War and Peace
Lev Nikolaevich Tolstoy

Collector's illustrated edition
The novel "War and Peace", one of the greatest works of Russian and world literature, was created by L. N. Tolstoy over the course of six years, rewritten eight times, and individual episodes - more than twenty times. Researchers count fifteen versions of the beginning of the novel alone. This book uses the second edition of "War and Peace" (1873), the most complete and convenient for reading, since Tolstoy translated the entire French text of the novel into Russian.

The book is supplied with a large number of illustrations showing the prototypes of the main characters, historical figures, as well as the chronicle of Napoleon's invasion of Russia. Russian literary scholar, Doctor of Philology Boris Sokolov gave detailed comments to them. From these comments, one can learn many interesting and unexpected details about the historical canvas of "War and Peace".

The publishing layout of the book is saved in PDF A4 format.





Lev Nikolaevich Tolstoy

War and Peace



© Sokolov B.V., comments, illustrations, 2021

© Algorithm Agency LLC, design, publication, 2021





L. N. Tolstoy




From the author


I have written so far only about princes, counts, ministers, senators and their children and I am afraid that in the future there will be no other persons in my history.

Perhaps this is not good and the public does not like it; perhaps the history of peasants, merchants, seminarians is more interesting and instructive for them, but, with all my desire to have as many readers as possible, I cannot please such taste, for many reasons.

Firstly, because the historical monuments of the time about which I write have remained only in the correspondence and notes of people of the highest literate circle; even the interesting and intelligent stories that I managed to hear, I heard only from people of the same circle.

Secondly, because the life of merchants, coachmen, seminarians, convicts and peasants seems monotonous and boring to me, and all the actions of these people seem to me to flow, for the most part, from the same springs: envy of more fortunate classes, greed and material passions. Even if not all the actions of these people flow from these springs, then their actions are so obscured by these motives that it is difficult to understand them and therefore describe them.

Thirdly, because the life of these people (the lower classes) bears less of the imprint of time.

Fourthly, because the life of these people is not beautiful.

Fifthly, because I could never understand what the guard thinks when he stands at the guardhouse, what the shopkeeper thinks and feels when he beckons you to buy suspenders and ties, what the seminarian thinks when he is led away for the hundredth time to be flogged with rods, etc. I cannot understand this any more than I can understand what a cow thinks when she is being milked, or what a horse thinks when he is carrying a barrel.

Sixthly, because, finally (and this, I know, is the best reason), I myself belong to the upper class, to society, and I love it.

I am not a bourgeois, as Pushkin said with pride, and I boldly say that I am an aristocrat, both by birth, and by habits, and by position. I am an aristocrat because I am not only not ashamed to remember my ancestors - my fathers, grandfathers, great-grandfathers, but especially joyfully. I am an aristocrat because I was brought up from childhood in love and respect for the elegant, expressed not only in Homer, Bach and Raphael, but also in all the little things in life: in love for clean hands, for a beautiful dress, an elegant table and carriage. I am an aristocrat because I was so happy that neither I, nor my father, nor my grandfather knew need and the struggle between conscience and need, never had the need to envy or bow to anyone, did not know the need to educate ourselves for money and for position in society and similar trials to which people in need are subjected. I see that this is a great happiness and I thank God for it, but if this happiness does not belong to everyone, then I see no reason to renounce it and not use it.

I am an aristocrat because I cannot believe in the high intelligence, refined taste and great honesty of a man who picks his nose with his finger and whose soul converses with God.

All this is very stupid, perhaps criminal, impudent, but it is so. And I declare to the reader in advance what kind of person I am and what he can expect from me. There is still time to close the book and expose me as an idiot, a retrograde and Askochensky, to whom I, taking advantage of this opportunity, hasten to declare the sincere and deep, serious respect I have long felt.






Yasnaya Polyana.




Part one





I


- Well, Prince, Genoa and Lucca have become nothing more than estates, estates of the Buonaparte family. No, I tell you in advance, if you do not tell me that we are at war, if you allow yourself to defend all the nastiness, all the horrors of this Antichrist (really, I believe that he is the Antichrist), I do not know you any more, you are no longer my friend, you are no longer my faithful slave, as you say. Well, hello, hello. I see that I am frightening you, sit down and tell me.

This is what the famous Anna Pavlovna Scherer, a lady-in-waiting and confidant of Empress Maria Feodorovna, said in July 1805, when she met the important and official Prince Vasily, who was the first to arrive for her party. Anna Pavlovna had been coughing for several days, she had the flu, as she said (flu was a new word then, used only by rare people), and therefore she did not work on duty and did not leave the house. In the notes sent out in the morning by a red footman, it was written indiscriminately to all:

“If you, Count (or Prince), have nothing better in mind and if the prospect of an evening with a poor sick woman does not frighten you too much, then I will be very glad to see you at my place today between 7 and 10 o’clock.

Anna Scherer".

“Oh, what a cruel attack!” replied the prince, who had entered, not at all embarrassed by such a meeting and smiling faintly, with a bright expression on his cunning face, in a court embroidered uniform, stockings, shoes and stars.

He spoke in that refined French language in which our grandfathers not only spoke but also thought, and with those quiet, patronizing intonations that are characteristic of a significant person who has grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, offering her his perfumed bald spot, shining white even among his gray hairs, and calmly sat down on the sofa.

"First of all, how is your health, my dear friend? Reassure your friend," he said, without changing his voice, and in a tone in which, due to decency and concern, indifference and even mockery shone through.

- How do you expect me to be healthy when you suffer morally? Is it possible to remain calm in our time, when a person has feelings, - said Anna Pavlovna. - You are with me all evening, I hope?

- And what about the English ambassador's holiday? It's Wednesday. I need to show up there, - said the prince. - My daughter will come for me and take me.

- I thought this holiday was cancelled. I admit, all these holidays and fireworks are becoming unbearable.

“If we had known that you wanted this, we would have cancelled the holiday,” said the prince, out of habit, like a wound-up clock, saying things that he did not want anyone to believe.

- Don't torture me. Well, what have you decided on the occasion of Novosiltsev's dispatch? You know everything.

- How can I tell you? - said the prince in a cold, bored tone. - What have we decided? We have decided that Bonaparte has burned his ships, and it seems that we are ready to burn ours too.

Prince Vasily, whether he spoke intelligent or stupid, animated or indifferent words, spoke them in such a tone as if he were repeating them for the thousandth time, like an actor repeating a role in an old play, as if the words did not come from his mind and as if he spoke them not with his mind, not with his heart, but from memory, with his lips alone.

Anna Pavlovna Scherer, on the contrary, despite her forty years, was full of animation and impulses, which long experience had barely taught her to restrain within the bounds of courtly deliberation, propriety and restraint. Every minute she was apparently ready to say something superfluous, but although she was a hair's breadth away from it, this superfluous thing did not break through. She was not pretty, but apparently the rapture of her gaze and the animation of her smile, which she herself was aware of, expressing her fascination with ideal interests, gave her what was called interestingness. From the words and expressions of Prince Vasily it was evident that in the circle in which they both moved, the generally recognized opinion had long been established of Anna Pavlovna as a sweet and kind enthusiast and patriot, who took on a cause that was not hers and often went to extremes, but was sweet in the sincerity and ardor of her feelings. Being an enthusiast became her social position, and sometimes, even when she did not want to be, she, in order not to deceive the expectations of people who knew her, became an enthusiast. The restrained smile that constantly played on Anna Pavlovna's face, although it did not suit her outlived features, expressed, like spoiled children, a constant awareness of her own sweet shortcoming, from which she does not want, cannot, and does not find it necessary to correct.

The contents of the dispatch from Novosiltsev, who went to Paris to negotiate peace, was as follows.

Arriving in Berlin, Novosiltsev learned that Buonaparte had issued a decree on the annexation of the Republic of Genoa to the French Empire at the very time when he was expressing a desire to make peace with England through the mediation of Russia. Novosiltsev, staying in Berlin and assuming that such violence from Buonaparte could change the intentions of Emperor Alexander, asked His Majesty's permission whether to go to Paris or return. Novosiltsev's answer had already been composed and was to be sent the following day. The seizure of Genoa was the desired pretext for declaring war, for which the opinion of court society was even more prepared than the army. The answer said: "We do not wish to negotiate with a man who, while expressing a desire to make peace, continues his invasions."

This was all the freshest news of the day. The prince, apparently, knew all these details from reliable sources and jokingly conveyed them to the maid of honor.

- Well, what have these negotiations led us to? - Anna Pavlovna said in French, as the entire conversation proceeded. - Well, what are all these negotiations for? Not negotiations, but death for the death of a martyr is what the villain needs, - she said, flaring her nostrils, turning on the sofa and then smiling.

- How bloodthirsty you are, my dear! In politics, not everything is done as in a drawing room. There are precautions, - said Prince Vasily with his sad smile, which was unnatural, but, having been repeated for thirty years, had become so familiar on the old prince's face that it seemed both unnatural and habitual. - Are there letters from yours? - he added, apparently considering the lady-in-waiting unworthy of a serious political conversation and trying to change the subject.

“But where did these precautions lead us?” Anna Pavlovna continued to ask, not giving in to him.

“If only to find out the opinion of Austria, which you love so much,” said Prince Vasily, apparently teasing Anna Pavlovna and not wanting to let the conversation go beyond its humorous tone.

But Anna Pavlovna got excited.

– Ah, don’t talk to me about Austria! I don’t understand anything, perhaps, but Austria never wanted and doesn’t want war. She is betraying us. Russia alone must be the savior of Europe. Our benefactor knows his high calling and will be true to it. That is one thing I believe in. Our kind and wonderful sovereign has the greatest role in the world ahead of him, and he is so virtuous and good that God will not abandon him, and he will fulfill his calling to crush the hydra of revolution, which is now even more terrible in the person of this murderer and villain. We alone must atone for the blood of the righteous. Whom can we rely on, I ask you? England with its commercial spirit will not understand and cannot understand the full height of the soul of Emperor Alexander. She refused to clear Malta. She wants to see, she seeks the back thought of our actions. What did they say to Novosiltsev? Nothing. They did not understand, they cannot understand the selflessness of our Emperor, who wants nothing for himself and wants everything for the good of the world. And what did they promise? Nothing. And what was promised will not happen. Prussia has already declared that Bonaparte is invincible and that all of Europe can do nothing against him... And I do not believe a single word of either Hardenberg or Haugwitz. This notorious neutrality of Prussia is only a trap. I believe in one God and in the high destiny of our dear Emperor. He will save Europe!..

She suddenly stopped with a smile of mockery at her own ardor.

“I think,” said the prince, smiling, “that if you had been sent instead of our dear Winzengerode, you would have taken the consent of the Prussian king by storm. You are so eloquent. Will you give me some tea?”

- Right now. By the way, - she added, calming down again, - I am going to see a very interesting man today, the Vicomte de Mortemart. He is related to Montmorency through the Rohans, one of the best families in France. He is one of the good emigrants, one of the real ones. He behaved very well and lost everything. He was with the Duke of Enghien, with the unfortunate holy martyr during his stay in Ettenheim. They say he is very nice. Your charming son Hippolyte promised to bring him to me. All our ladies are crazy about him, - she added with a smile of contempt, as if she pitied the poor ladies who could not think of anything better than to fall in love with the Vicomte de Mortemart.

"Except you, of course," said the prince, still in his tone of laughter. "I have seen him, this Viscount, in society," he added, apparently little interested in the hope of seeing Mortemar. "Tell me," he said, as if he had just remembered something, and especially casually, although what he was asking about was the main purpose of his visit, "is it true that the Empress Mother wishes Baron Funke to be appointed First Secretary in Vienna? This Baron, it seems, is an insignificant person.

Prince Vasily wanted to appoint his son to this position, which they tried to deliver to the baron through Empress Maria Feodorovna.

Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes as a sign that neither she nor anyone else could judge what the Empress liked or liked.

"Baron Funke was recommended to the Empress Mother by her sister," she said in a particularly sad, dry tone. As Anna Pavlovna named the Empress, her face suddenly presented a deep and sincere expression of devotion and respect, combined with sadness, which happened to her every time she mentioned her high patroness in conversation. She said that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke much respect, and again her gaze was covered with sadness.

The prince fell silent indifferently. Anna Pavlovna, with her characteristic courtly and feminine dexterity and quick tact, wanted to both snap at the prince for daring to speak so of the person recommended to the empress, and at the same time console him.

- By the way, about your family, - she said, - do you know that your daughter is the delight of all society. She is considered beautiful as day. The Empress very often asks about her: "What is the beautiful Helen doing?"

The prince bowed in a sign of respect and gratitude.

“I often think,” Anna Pavlovna continued after a moment’s silence, moving closer to the prince and smiling affectionately at him, as if to show by this that political and social conversations were over and that a heart-to-heart conversation was now beginning, “I often think how unfairly life’s happiness is sometimes distributed. Why did fate give you such two wonderful children (excluding Anatole, your youngest, I don’t like him,” she added peremptorily, raising her eyebrows), such delightful children? And you, really, value them the least of all and therefore are not worthy of them.

And she smiled her delighted smile.

"What do you want? Lavater would say that I don't have the bump of parental love," the prince said languidly.

- Stop joking. I wanted to talk to you seriously. You know, I am not pleased with your youngest son. I don’t know him at all, but it seems he has set himself the task of making a scandalous reputation. Between you and me (her face took on a sad expression), they were talking about him at Her Majesty’s, and they are sorry for you…

The prince did not answer, but she, silently, looking at him significantly, waited for an answer. Prince Vasily winced.

“What do you want me to do?” he said at last. “You know, I have done everything a father can for their upbringing, and both have turned out fools. Ippolit, at least, is a quiet fool, but Anatole is restless. That is one difference,” he said, smiling more unnaturally and animatedly than usual, and at the same time especially sharply revealing in the wrinkles that had formed around his mouth something so coarse and unpleasant that it occurred to Anna Pavlovna: it must not be very pleasant to be the son or daughter of such a father.

- And why should children be born to people like you? If you were not the father, I could not reproach you for anything, - said Anna Pavlovna, raising her eyes thoughtfully.

- I am your faithful slave, and I can confess it to you alone. My children are a burden to my existence. They are my cross. That is how I explain it to myself. What do you want? - He paused, expressing with a gesture his submission to cruel fate. - Yes, if it were possible to have and not have them at will... I am sure that in our century this invention will be made.

Anna Pavlovna did not like the idea of ​​such an invention.

- Have you ever thought about marrying off your prodigal son Anatole? They say that old maids have a mania for marrying.

I don’t feel this weakness in myself yet, but I have one little person who is very unhappy with her father, our relative, Princess Bolkonskaya.

Prince Vasily did not answer, although with the quickness of thought and memory characteristic of secular people, he showed with a movement of his head that he had taken this information into consideration.

- No, do you know that this Anatole costs me 40,000 a year, - he said, apparently unable to restrain the sad course of his thoughts. He was silent. - What will happen in five years, if this goes on? This is the advantage of being a father. Is she rich, your princess?

- Father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the village. You know, this famous Prince Bolkonsky, dismissed during the reign of the late Emperor and nicknamed the King of Prussia. He is a very intelligent man, but strange and difficult. The poor thing is unhappy. She has a brother, who recently married Liza Meinen, Kutuzov's adjutant, lives here and will be with me now. She is my only daughter.

- Listen, dear Annette, - said the prince, suddenly taking his interlocutor by the hand and bending her down for some reason. - Arrange this matter for me, and I will be your most faithful slave forever. She is of good family and rich. All I need.

And he, with those free and familiar, graceful movements that distinguished him, took the maid of honor by the hand, kissed her and, having kissed her, waved the maid of honor’s hand, sprawling in the chair and looking away.

- Wait, - said Anna Pavlovna, thinking. - I will talk to Liza, the wife of young Bolkonsky, today. And maybe it will be settled. I will begin to learn the craft of an old maid in your family.




II


Anna Pavlovna's drawing room began to fill up little by little. The highest nobility of Petersburg had arrived, people of the most diverse ages and characters, but identical in the society in which they all lived; the diplomat Count Z. arrived, wearing the stars and orders of all the foreign courts, Princess L., a fading beauty, the ambassador's wife; a decrepit general entered, clanking his sabre and groaning; Prince Vasily's daughter, the beautiful Helen, entered, having come for her father to go with him to the ambassador's feast. She was wearing a cipher and a ball gown. Also arriving was the young, little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as the most charming woman in Petersburg, who had married the previous winter and now did not go out into high society because of her pregnancy, but still went to small soirees.

“You haven’t seen my aunt yet, or you’re not acquainted with her,” Anna Pavlovna said to the arriving guests, and very seriously led them up to a little old lady in high bows who had emerged from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive; she called them by name, slowly moving her eyes from the guest to the aunt, and then walked away. All the guests performed the ritual of greeting an aunt unknown to anyone, uninteresting to anyone, and unnecessary. Anna Pavlovna watched their greetings with sad, solemn participation, silently approving of them. The aunt spoke to each one in the same expressions about his health, about her health, and about the health of Her Majesty, who was, thank God, better today. All who approached, out of decency not showing haste, with a feeling of relief at having fulfilled a heavy duty, walked away from the old lady, so as not to approach her even once the entire evening. The ten or so men and women present were seated, some at the tea table, some in the corner behind the dressing table, some by the window; all were talking and moving freely from one group to another.

The young princess Bolkonskaya arrived with her work in a gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty upper lip, with its slightly blackened moustache, was short over her teeth, but it opened all the more charmingly and sometimes stretched out and fell over the lower lip even more charmingly. As always happens with quite attractive women, her shortness of lip and half-open mouth seemed her special, her very beauty. Everyone was happy to look at this pretty future mother, full of health and vivacity, who bore her situation so easily. It seemed to the old men and the bored, gloomy young men who looked at her that they themselves were becoming like her, having been and talked with her for a while. Anyone who spoke to her and saw at every word her bright smile and shining white teeth, which were constantly visible, thought that he was especially charming today. And everyone thought so. The little princess, waddling, walked around the table with her work bag on her arm in short, quick steps and, happily straightening her dress, sat down on the sofa near the silver samovar, as if everything she did was entertainment for her and for everyone around her.

“I have brought work,” she said, unfolding her reticule and addressing them all together.

"Look, Anna, don't play a bad joke on me," she said to the hostess. "You wrote to me that you had a very short evening, and you see how badly I'm dressed."

And she spread her arms to show her elegant, grey dress, trimmed with lace, and belted with a wide ribbon just below her breasts.

“Don’t worry, Liz, you will always be the best,” answered Anna Pavlovna.

"You know, my husband is leaving me, he is going to his death," she continued in the same tone, turning to the general. "Tell me, why this nasty war?" she turned to Prince Vasily and, without waiting for an answer, turned to Prince Vasily's daughter, the beautiful Helen: "You know, Helen, you are becoming too good, too good."

“What a charming person this little princess is!” Prince Vasily said quietly to Anna Pavlovna.

- Your charming son Ippolit is madly in love with her.

- This fool has taste.

Soon after the little princess, a fat young man with a cropped head, spectacles, light trousers in the fashion of the time, a high jabot and a brown tailcoat entered. This fat young man, despite the fashionable cut of his dress, was clumsy and awkward, as healthy peasant lads are sometimes awkward and clumsy. But he was not shy and resolute in his movements. For a moment he stopped in the middle of the drawing room, not finding the hostess and bowing to everyone except her, despite the signs she made to him. Taking the old aunt for Anna Pavlovna herself, he sat down next to her and began to talk to her, but finally learning from the surprised face of the aunt that this should not be done, he stood up and said:

- Excuse me, mademoiselle, I thought it wasn't you.

Even the impassive aunt blushed at these senseless words and waved desperately to her niece, inviting her to help her. Anna Pavlovna, who had been busy with another guest, approached her.

“It is very kind of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit the poor sick woman,” she said to him, smiling and exchanging glances with her aunt.

Pierre did even worse. He sat down next to Anna Pavlovna with the air of a man who would not soon rise, and immediately began a conversation with her about Rousseau, about whom they had spoken on their last but one meeting. Anna Pavlovna had no time. She listened, looked around, placed and moved the guests.

“I cannot understand,” said the young man, looking significantly through his glasses at his interlocutor, “why people don’t like Confession, while New Eloise is much more insignificant.”

The fat young man awkwardly expressed his thoughts and challenged Anna Pavlovna to an argument, completely unaware that the maid of honor did not care at all whether the composition was good or bad, especially now, when she had so much to think about and remember.

"Let the trumpet of the last judgment sound, I will appear with my book in my hands," he said, smilingly quoting the first page of "Confession." "After reading this book, you will love a person."

“Yes, of course,” Anna Pavlovna answered, despite the fact that she had a completely opposite opinion, and looked around at the guests, wanting to get up. But Pierre continued:

- This is not just a book, it is an act. It is a complete confession. Isn't it?

“But I don’t want to be his confessor, Monsieur Pierre, his sins are too vile,” she said, standing up and smiling. “Come, I’ll introduce you to my cousin.”

And, having got rid of the young man who did not know how to live, she returned to her occupation as a housewife and continued to listen and look out, ready to lend a hand at the point where the conversation was slackening, just as the owner of a spinning mill, having seated the workers in their places, walks around the establishment and notices whether all the spindles are turning. Just as the owner of a spinning mill, noticing the immobility or the unusual, creaking, too loud sound of a spindle, hurries, holds it back or sets it in the proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna approached a circle that had fallen silent or was talking too much and with one word or a movement again started up the even, decent conversational machine.




III


Anna Pavlovna's party was under way. The spindles rustled steadily and incessantly from all sides. Apart from Auntie, near whom sat only one elderly lady with a thin, tear-stained face, somewhat of a stranger in this brilliant society, and also apart from the fat Monsieur Pierre, who after his tactless conversations with Auntie and Anna Pavlovna was silent the whole evening, apparently not acquainted with almost anyone, and only glanced animatedly at those who walked and spoke louder than the others, the company was divided into three circles. In one, the center was the beautiful Princess Helene, the daughter of Prince Vasily, in another - Anna Pavlovna herself, in the third - the pretty, rosy-cheeked and too plump for her youth little Princess Bolkonskaya.

Prince Vasily's son Ippolit entered, "your charming son Ippolit," as Anna Pavlovna invariably called him, and the expected viscount, who, according to Anna Pavlovna, "all our ladies" went crazy over. Ippolit entered, looking through his lorgnette, and without lowering his lorgnette, loudly but unclearly muttered: "Viscount de Mortemar," and immediately, paying no attention to his father, sat down next to the little princess and, bending his head so close to her that between her face and his there was a distance of less than a quarter, began to say something to her frequently and unclearly and laugh.

The Viscount was a comely young man with soft features and manners, who obviously considered himself a celebrity, but, due to his good manners, modestly allowed himself to be enjoyed by the society in which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna obviously treated her guests to him. Just as a good maitre d' serves as something supernaturally beautiful that piece of beef which one would not want to eat if one saw it in a dirty kitchen, so that evening Anna Pavlovna served the Viscount to her guests as something supernaturally refined, while the gentlemen who stood with him in the same hotel and played billiards with him every day saw in him only a great master of carambola and did not at all find themselves happy from seeing and talking with the Viscount.

They immediately began talking about the murder of the Duke of Enghien. The Viscount said that the Duke of Enghien had died from his generosity and that there were special reasons for Buonaparte's bitterness.

- Ah! Tell us about it, Viscount, - said Anna Pavlovna.

The Viscount bowed in submission and smiled politely. Anna Pavlovna circled around the Viscount and invited everyone to listen to his story.

“The Viscount was personally acquainted with the Duke,” Anna Pavlovna whispered to one.

“The Viscount is an amazing storyteller,” she said to the other.

“As now, one sees a man of good society,” she said to the third, and the Viscount was served to the company in the most elegant and advantageous light, like roast beef on a hot plate and sprinkled with greens.

The Viscount was about to begin his story and smiled subtly.

“Come here, dear Helen,” said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful princess, who was sitting at a distance, forming the center of another circle.

Princess Helene smiled; she rose with the same unchanging smile of a perfectly beautiful woman with which she had entered the drawing room. Slightly rustling her white ball robe, trimmed with plush and fur, and shining with the whiteness of her shoulders, the shine of her hair and diamonds, she walked between the men who had parted and straight, without looking at anyone, but smiling at everyone and as if graciously allowing everyone the right to admire the beauty of her figure, her full shoulders, her very open bosom and back according to the fashion of the time, and as if bringing with her the glitter of the ball, she approached Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so beautiful that not only was there no trace of coquetry noticeable in her, but, on the contrary, she seemed ashamed of her undoubted and too strong and triumphantly effective beauty. She seemed to want and could not belittle her beauty. “What a beauty!” said everyone who saw her.

As if struck by something extraordinary, the Viscount shrugged his shoulders and lowered his eyes, while she sat down in front of him and illuminated him with the same unchanging smile.

“Madame, I really fear for my abilities in front of such an audience,” he said, bowing his head with a smile.

The princess leaned her open, plump arm on the table and did not find it necessary to say anything. She waited, smiling. During the whole story she sat upright, occasionally glancing now at her plump, beautiful arm, which had changed shape from the pressure on the table, now at her even more beautiful bosom, on which she adjusted her diamond necklace, adjusted the folds of her dress several times, and, when the story made an impression, looked back at Anna Pavlovna and immediately assumed the same expression that was on the face of the maid of honor, and then again calmed down in a radiant smile. Following Helen, the little princess also moved away from the tea table.

“Wait, I’ll take my job,” she said.

“What are you thinking about?” she said to Prince Ippolit. “Bring me my reticule.”

The princess, smiling and talking to everyone, suddenly made a rearrangement and, sitting down, cheerfully straightened herself.

“Now I feel good,” she said, and, asking him to begin, she set to work. Prince Ippolit carried her reticule, crossed after her, and, moving a chair close to her, sat down next to her.

The charming Ippolit struck by his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister and even more by the fact that, despite the resemblance, he was strikingly ugly. His facial features were the same as his sister's, but in her everything was illuminated by a cheerful, self-satisfied, youthful, unchanging smile of life and an extraordinary antique beauty of body; in his brother, on the contrary, the same face was clouded by idiocy and invariably expressed self-confident grumpiness, and his body was thin and weak. Eyes, nose, mouth - everything was compressed as if into one indefinite and boring grimace, and the arms and legs always assumed unnatural positions.

"This isn't a ghost story?" he said, sitting down beside the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette to his eyes, as if he could not begin to speak without this instrument.

“Not at all,” said the surprised narrator, shrugging his shoulders.

"The thing is, I can't stand ghost stories," he said in a tone that suggested he had said the words before he realized what they meant.

Because of the self-confidence with which he spoke, no one could understand whether what he said was very clever or very stupid. He was wearing a dark green tailcoat, trousers the color of the thigh of a frightened nymph, as he himself said, stockings and shoes. He sat down in the very back of the chair opposite the narrator, placed one hand with a ring and an armorial seal in front of him on the table in such an extended position that it cost him, apparently, great difficulty to hold it in this position, but during the whole story he held his hand like that. With his other hand he held a lorgnette in the palm of his hand and with the same hand he straightened his hair up, which gave an even stranger expression to his elongated face, and, as if remembering something, he began to look at his outstretched hand with rings, then at the Viscount's legs, then he turned around quickly and uncoiled, as he did everything, and looked intently for a long time at the princess.

“When I had the good fortune to see the Duke of Enghien, of blessed and sad memory, for the last time,” the Viscount began, with an elegant sadness in his voice, looking round at his audience, “he spoke in the most flattering terms of the beauty and genius of the great Georges. Who does not know this brilliant and charming woman? I expressed my surprise at how the Duke could have known her, having not been in Paris these last years. The Duke smiled and told me that Paris was not so far from Mannheim as it seemed. I was horrified and expressed my fear to His Highness at the thought of his visiting Paris. “Sir,” I said, “God knows whether we are not surrounded here by traitors and traitors, and whether your presence in Paris, however secret, will not be known to Buonaparte?” But the Duke only smiled at my words with the chivalry and courage that are the distinguishing features of his family.

“The House of Condé is a branch of laurel grafted onto the tree of the Bourbons, as Pitt recently said,” Prince Vasily said monotonously, as if he were dictating to some invisible scribe.

“Mr. Pitt expressed himself very well,” his son Ippolit added laconically, decisively turning his body in one direction and his feet in the opposite direction in his chair, hastily catching his lorgnette and directing his gaze through it at his parent.

“In a word,” continued the Viscount, addressing himself chiefly to the beautiful princess, who never took her eyes off him, “I had to leave Ettenheim and learned later that the Duke, carried away by his courage, had gone to Paris, and had done Mademoiselle Georges the honor of not only admiring her, but also of visiting her.

“But he had a heartfelt attachment to Princess Charlotte de Rohan Rochefort,” Anna Pavlovna interrupted hotly. “They said that he was secretly married to her,” she said, apparently frightened by the future content of the story, which seemed too free to her in the presence of a young girl.

“One attachment does not interfere with another,” the Viscount continued, smiling subtly and not noticing Anna Pavlovna’s fears. “But the fact is that Mademoiselle Georges, before her intimacy with the Duke, enjoyed intimacy with another person.”

He was silent for a moment.

“This man’s name was Buonaparte,” he said, looking around at his listeners with a smile.

Anna Pavlovna, in turn, looked around uneasily, seeing that the story was becoming more and more dangerous.

"Well," the Viscount continued, "the new Sultan from the 'A Thousand and One Nights' did not disdain to spend his evenings often with the most beautiful, most pleasant woman in France. And Mademoiselle Georges," he paused, shrugging his shoulders expressively, "had to turn necessity into virtue. Lucky Buonaparte usually came in the evenings, without appointing his days.

“Ah! I foresee it, and it makes me feel terrified,” said the pretty little princess, shrugging her plump and flexible shoulders.

The elderly lady, who had been sitting all evening near her aunt, moved over to the storyteller's circle, shaking her head and smiling significantly and sadly.

"It's awful, isn't it?" she said, although she had obviously not heard the beginning of the story. No one noticed the inappropriateness of her remark or her.

Prince Ippolit announced quickly and loudly:

- Georges is amazing as Clytemnestra!

Anna Pavlovna was silent and uneasy, not having yet decided in her mind whether what the Viscount was saying was decent or indecent. On the one hand, there were evening visits from actresses; on the other hand, if the Viscount de Mortemart, a relative of Montmorency through the Rohans, the best representative of the Saint-Germain faubourg, were to say indecent things in the drawing room, then who, finally, knew what was decent and indecent?

- One evening, - continued the Viscount, looking around at the audience and becoming animated, - this Clytemnestra, having charmed the entire theater with her amazing rendering of Racine, returned home and thought to rest from fatigue and excitement. She did not expect the Sultan.

Anna Pavlovna shuddered at the word "sultan". The princess lowered her eyes and stopped smiling.

- When suddenly the maid reported that the former Viscount Rocroy wished to see the great actress. Rocroy - that was what the Duke called himself. He was received, - added the Viscount and, after a few seconds of silence to make it clear that he was not telling everything he knew, continued: - The table sparkled with crystal, enamel, silver and porcelain. There were two places, time flew by unnoticed, and pleasure...

Unexpectedly, at this point in the story, Prince Ippolit made a strange loud sound, which some took for a cough, others for blowing his nose, mooing or laughter, and began to hurriedly catch the dropped lorgnette. The narrator stopped in surprise. Anna Pavlovna, frightened, interrupted the description of the pleasures that the Viscount described with such relish.

“Don’t keep us waiting, Viscount,” she said.

The Viscount smiled.

– The pleasure turned hours into minutes, when suddenly a bell rang, and a frightened maid, trembling, ran to announce that the terrible Bonaparte Mameluke was calling and that his terrible master was already standing at the entrance...

“Charming,” whispered the little princess, sticking her needle into her work, as if to show that the interest and charm of the story prevented her from continuing her work.

The Viscount appreciated this silent praise and, smiling gratefully, was about to continue when a new face entered the drawing room and made the necessary stop.




IV


The new face was the young Prince Andrey Bolkonsky, the husband of the little princess. Not so much because the young prince had arrived so late, but was nevertheless received by his hostess in the most amiable manner, but because he entered the room, it was evident that he was one of those young men of the world who are so spoiled by society that they even despise it. The young prince was short, very handsome, thin, dark-haired, with a somewhat emaciated appearance, a brown complexion, extremely elegant clothes and tiny hands and feet. Everything about his figure, from his tired, bored look to his lazy and weak gait, presented the sharpest contrast with his small, lively wife. Apparently, everyone in the drawing room was not only familiar to him, but had already become so boring to him that it was very boring for him to look at them and listen to them, because he knew in advance everything that would happen. Of all the faces that bored him, the face of his pretty wife seemed to bore him the most. With a sour, weak grimace that spoiled his handsome face, he turned away from her, as if he thought: "You are all that was missing for this whole company to become completely disgusting to me." He kissed Anna Pavlovna's hand with an air as if he were ready to give God knows what to be rid of this heavy duty, and squinting, almost closing his eyes and wincing, he looked around at the whole company.

“You have a convention,” he said in a thin voice and nodded his head to some people, and extended his hand to others, offering it for a handshake.

“Are you going to war, Prince?” said Anna Pavlovna.

“General Kutuzov,” he said, emphasizing the last syllable of the call like a Frenchman, removing the glove from his tiny, white hand and rubbing his eyes with it, “General-in-Chief Kutuzov is calling me to be his adjutant.”

- And Lisa, your wife?

- She will go to the village.

– How is it not a sin for you to deprive us of your lovely wife?

The young adjutant made a contemptuous sound with his protruding lips, such as only the French make, and said nothing.

“Andrey,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish tone in which she addressed strangers, “come here, sit down, and listen to the story the Viscount is telling about Mademoiselle Georges and Bonaparte.”

Andrey closed his eyes and sat in a completely different direction, as if he had not heard his wife.

“Go on, Viscount,” said Anna Pavlovna. “The Viscount was telling how the Duke of Enghien visited Mademoiselle Georges,” she added, turning to the man who had entered so that he could follow the rest of the story.

"The imaginary rivalry of Bonaparte and the Duke over Georges," said Prince Andrey in a tone as if it would be funny for anyone not to know about it, and he fell back on the arm of the chair. At that moment a young man in spectacles, called Monsieur Pierre, who had not taken his joyful, friendly eyes off Prince Andrey since his entry into the drawing room, came up to him and took him by the hand. Prince Andrey was so little curious that, without looking around, he wrinkled his face in advance into a grimace expressing annoyance at the one who was touching him, but, seeing Pierre's smiling face, he smiled too, and suddenly his whole face was transformed. A kind and intelligent expression suddenly appeared on it.

- What? Are you here, my dear cavalry guard? - the prince asked joyfully, but with a patronizing and arrogant tone.

“I knew you would be,” answered Pierre. “I’ll come and have dinner with you,” he added quietly, so as not to disturb the Viscount, who was continuing his story. “May I?”

“No, you can’t,” said Prince Andrei, laughing and turning away, but shaking his hand letting Pierre know that there was no need to ask.

The Viscount told how Mademoiselle Georges begged the Duke to hide, how the Duke said that he had never hidden from anyone, how Mademoiselle Georges told him: “Your Highness, your sword belongs to the King and to France,” and how the Duke nevertheless hid under the linen in another room, and how Napoleon felt ill, and the Duke came out from under the linen and saw Buonaparte in front of him.

“Charming, delightful!” was heard among the listeners.

Even Anna Pavlovna, having noticed that the most difficult part of the story had been passed safely, and having calmed down, could fully enjoy the story. The Viscount flared up and, lisping, spoke with the animation of an actor...

– The enemy of his house, the usurper of his throne, the one who led his nation, was here before him, motionless on the ground, perhaps at his last breath. As the great Corneille said: “A malicious joy rose in his heart, and only his insulted majesty helped him not to succumb to it.”

The Viscount stopped and, about to go on with his story even more forcefully, smiled, as if to reassure the ladies, who were already too excited. Quite unexpectedly, during this pause, the beautiful Princess Helene looked at her watch, exchanged glances with her father and stood up with him, and with this movement she upset the circle and interrupted the story.

“We’ll be late, Dad,” she said simply, continuing to beam her smile at everyone.

“Excuse me, my dear Viscount,” Prince Vasily addressed the Frenchman, affectionately pulling him down by the sleeve to the chair so that he would not get up. “This unfortunate celebration at the ambassador’s is depriving me of pleasure and interrupting you.”

“I am very sad to leave your delightful evening,” he said to Anna Pavlovna.

His daughter, Princess Helen, slightly holding the folds of her dress, walked between the chairs, and the smile shone even brighter on her beautiful face.




V


Anna Pavlovna asked the Viscount to wait for her and went to accompany Prince Vasily and his daughter to the other room. The elderly lady, who had been sitting with her aunt and who had then shown such a senseless interest in the Viscount's story, quickly stood up and caught up with Prince Vasily in the hall.

All the previous pretense of interest had disappeared from her face. Her kind, tear-stained face expressed only anxiety and fear.

“What will you tell me, Prince, about my Boris?” she said, catching up with him in the hall (she pronounced the name Boris with a special emphasis on the o). “I cannot remain in Petersburg any longer. Tell me, what news can I bring my poor boy?”

Despite the fact that Prince Vasily listened to the elderly lady reluctantly and almost impolitely and even showed impatience, she smiled at him kindly and touchingly and, so that he would not leave, took him by the hand.

“It only takes you to say a word to the sovereign, and he will be transferred straight to the guard,” she asked.

“Believe me, I will do everything I can, Princess,” answered Prince Vasily, “but it is difficult for me to ask the sovereign; I would advise you to turn to Razumovsky, through Prince Golitsyn, that would be smarter.”

The elderly lady bore the name of Princess Drubetskaya, one of the best families in Russia, but she was poor, had long since left society and lost her former connections. She had come now to obtain a place in the guards for her only son. Only in order to see Prince Vasily did she give her name and come to the evening at Anna Pavlovna's, only then did she listen to the Viscount's story. She was frightened by Prince Vasily's words; her once beautiful face expressed almost contempt, but this lasted only a minute. She smiled again and clutched Prince Vasily's hand more tightly.

- Listen, Prince, - she said, - I never asked you, I never will ask you, I never reminded you of my father's friendship for you. But now I conjure you by God, do this for my son, and I will consider you a benefactor, - she added hastily. - No, don't be angry, but you promise me. I asked Golitsyn, he refused. Be a good man, as you always were, - she said, trying to smile, although there were tears in her eyes.

“Dad, we’ll be late,” said Princess Helen, who was waiting at the door, turning her beautiful head on her antique shoulders.

But influence in society is a capital that must be protected, lest it disappear. Prince Vasily knew this, and having once decided that if he were to intercede for everyone who asked him, then soon he would be unable to intercede for anyone, he rarely used his influence. In the case of Princess Drubetskaya, however, after her new appeal, he felt something like a reproach of conscience. She reminded him of the truth: he owed his first steps in the service to her father. Besides, he saw from her manners that she was one of those women, especially mothers, who, once they have taken something into their heads, will not leave you until their wishes are fulfilled, and otherwise are ready for daily, minute-by-minute pestering and even scenes. This last consideration shook him.

“Dear Anna Mikhailovna,” he said with his usual familiarity and boredom in his voice, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you want, but to prove to you how much I love you and honor the memory of the late Count, your father, I will do the impossible. Your son will be transferred to the Guards, here is my hand. Are you satisfied?”

And he shook her hand, yanking it down.

- My dear, you are a benefactor! I did not expect anything else from you, - this is how the mother lied and humiliated herself, - I knew how kind you were.

He wanted to leave.

- Wait, two words. Once he transfers to the guards... - she hesitated. - You are good with Mikhail Illarionovich Kutuzov, recommend Boris to him as an adjutant. Then I would be at peace, and then...

Anna Mikhailovna, like a gypsy, begged for her son, the more they gave her, the more. Prince Vasily smiled.

- I don't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov has been besieged since he was appointed commander-in-chief. He himself told me that all the Moscow ladies have agreed to give him all their children as adjutants.

- No, promise, I won’t let you go, my dear, my benefactor...

“Dad,” the beauty repeated in the same tone, “we’ll be late.”

- Well, goodbye. See?

- So, will you report to the sovereign tomorrow?

- Certainly, but I can’t promise Kutuzov.

"No, promise, promise, Vasily," said Anna Mikhailovna after him, with the smile of a young coquette, which must once have been characteristic of her, but now did not suit her exhausted, kind face. She had apparently forgotten her age and was using, out of habit, all the old feminine means. But as soon as he left, her face again assumed the same cold, feigned expression that had been on it before. She returned to the circle in which the Viscount was continuing his story, and again pretended to listen, waiting for the time to leave, since her business was done.




VI


The end of the Viscount's story was as follows:

"The Duke of Enghien took from his pocket a flask of rock crystal, framed in gold, containing the drops of life given to his father by the Count of Saint-Germain. These drops, as is well known, had the property of reviving the dead or nearly dead, but they were not to be given to anyone except members of the House of Condé. Strangers who tasted the drops were cured in the same way as Condé, but became implacable enemies of the ducal house. Proof of this is that the Duke's father, wishing to cure his dying horse, gave him these drops. The horse came to life, but then attempted several times to kill its rider and once carried him away during a battle into the Republican camp. The Duke's father killed his favorite horse. Despite this, the young and chivalrous Duke of Enghien poured a few drops into the mouth of his enemy Bonaparte, and the monster came to life.

“Who are you?” asked Buonaparte.

“A relative of the servant,” answered the Duke.

“Lies!” cried Buonaparte.

“General, I am unarmed,” replied the Duke.

- Your name?

“I saved your life,” replied the Duke.

The Duke left, and the drops took effect, and Buonaparte felt hatred for the Duke and from that day on swore to destroy the unfortunate and magnanimous youth. Through his minions, having learned from the Duke's forgotten handkerchief, on which was embroidered the coat of arms of the House of Condé, who his rival was, Buonaparte ordered a pretext to be invented for a conspiracy by Pichegru and Georges Cadoudal, seized the martyr-hero in the Duchy of Baden and killed him.

- Angel and demon. And this is how the most terrible crime in history was committed.

With this the Viscount concluded his story and, overcome with emotion, turned over in his chair. Everyone was silent.

“The murder of the Duke was more than a crime, Viscount,” said Prince Andrei, smiling slightly, as if he were making fun of the Viscount, “it was a mistake.”

The Viscount raised his eyebrows and spread his hands. His gesture could mean many things.

- But how do you find this whole latest comedy of the Milanese anointing? - said Anna Pavlovna. - And here is a new comedy: the people of Genoa and Lucca express their wishes to Mr. Buonaparte. And Mr. Buonaparte sits on the throne and fulfills the wishes of the peoples. Oh, it's delightful! No, it's enough to drive you crazy. You'd think the whole world had lost its mind.

Prince Andrei turned away from Anna Pavlovna, as if thinking that these conversations were leading nowhere.

- "God gave me the crown. Woe to him who touches it," said Prince Andrei with pride, as if those were his words (Napoleon's words, spoken when he laid the crown). - They say he was very good when he said those words, - he added.

Anna Pavlovna looked sternly at Prince Andrei.

"I hope," she continued, "that this was at last the drop that will make the glass overflow. The sovereigns can no longer tolerate this man who threatens everything."

- Gentlemen? I am not speaking of Russia, - said the Viscount politely and hopelessly: - Gentlemen! But what have they done for Louis XVI, for the Queen, for Elizabeth? Nothing! - he continued, becoming animated. - And believe me, they are being punished for their betrayal of the Bourbon cause. Gentlemen? They are sending ambassadors to greet the usurper of the throne.

And he, sighing contemptuously, again changed his position. Prince Ippolit, who had been looking at the Viscount through his lorgnette for a long time, suddenly, at these words, turned his whole body towards the little princess and, asking her for a needle, began to show her, drawing with the needle on the table, the Conde coat of arms. He explained this coat of arms to her with such a significant air, as if the princess had asked him about it.

"The Condé coat of arms is a shield with red and blue narrow jagged stripes," he said. The princess listened, smiling.

"If Bonaparte remains on the throne of France for another year," the Viscount continued the conversation with the air of a man who does not listen to others, but in a matter that is best known to him, follows only the course of his own thoughts, "then things will go too far with intrigue, violence, exiles, executions. Society, I mean good society, French society, will be destroyed forever, and then?

He shrugged and spread his hands.

"Emperor Alexander," said Anna Pavlovna with the sadness that always accompanied her speeches about the imperial family, "declared that he would allow the French themselves to choose their form of government. And I think there is no doubt that the entire nation, freed from the usurper, will throw itself into the hands of the legitimate king," said Anna Pavlovna, trying to be more amiable with the emigrant and royalist.

“Oh, if only this happy moment could come!” said the Viscount, bowing his head in gratitude for the attention.

- What do you think, Monsieur Pierre? - Anna Pavlovna asked affectionately of the fat young man, whose awkward silence weighed on her as a kind hostess. - What do you think? You have recently left Paris.

Anna Pavlovna, waiting for an answer, smiled at the Viscount and the others, as if to say: I must be polite to him too; you see, I am addressing him too, although I know that he cannot say anything.




VII


"The whole nation will die for its Emperor, for the greatest man in the world!" suddenly, without any preparation, the young man, who looked like a peasant boy, spoke loudly and passionately, with an air as if he were afraid of being interrupted and that he would not find time to speak fully after the opportunity. He looked back at Prince Andrei. Prince Andrei smiled.

“The greatest genius of our century,” Pierre continued.

- What? That's your opinion? You're joking! - Anna Pavlovna cried out with a fright that came not so much from the words spoken by the young man as from the animation, not at all showy and completely indecent, that was expressed in the large and fleshy features of the young man and especially in the sound of his voice, which was too loud and, most importantly, natural. He made no gestures, spoke intermittently, occasionally adjusting his glasses and looking around, but it was clear from his whole figure that no one would stop him now and that he would express his entire thought without thinking about propriety. The young man was like a wild, unbroken horse, which, as long as it is not saddled or collared, is meek, even timid, and no different from other horses, but which, as soon as harness is put on it, suddenly begins, for no apparent reason, to bend its head, rear up, and buck in the most ridiculous way, which it itself is not happy about. The young man apparently sensed the harness and began his funny bucking.

“Nobody in France even thinks about the Bourbons now,” he continued, hurrying to avoid being interrupted, and constantly looking back at Prince Andrei, as if he expected support from him alone. “Don’t forget that it’s only been three months since I arrived from Paris.”

He spoke excellent French.

- The Vicomte quite rightly believes that it will be too late for the Bourbons in a year. And now it is too late. There are no more royalists. Some have abandoned their fatherland, others have become Bonapartists. The entire Faubourg Saint-Germain bows before the Emperor.

“There are exceptions,” the Viscount said condescendingly.

The socialite and habitual Anna Pavlovna looked anxiously now at the Viscount, now at the indecent young man and could not forgive herself for having carelessly invited this young man without getting to know him first.

The indecent youth was the illegitimate son of a famous rich man and nobleman. Anna Pavlovna invited him out of respect for her father and taking into account that this Monsieur Pierre had just arrived from abroad, where he had been brought up.

"If I had known that he was so badly brought up and a Bonapartist," she thought, looking at his large, cropped head and fleshy, large features. "This is the education they give young people nowadays," she thought. "You can immediately see a man of good society," she said to herself, admiring the Viscount's calm.

“Almost all the nobility,” Pierre continued, “went over to Bonaparte.

"The Bonapartists say so," said the Viscount. "It is now difficult to know the public opinion of France."

“According to Bonaparte,” said Prince Andrei, and everyone involuntarily turned to his quiet, lazy, but always audible in its self-confidence voice, expecting to hear what Bonaparte had said.

“I showed them the path to glory, they did not want it,” Prince Andrei continued after a short silence, again repeating Napoleon’s words: “I opened my antechambers to them, they rushed in a crowd.” I do not know to what extent he had the right to say so, but it is evil, very evil,” he concluded with a sour smile and turned away.

“He had the right to say this against the royalist aristocracy; it is no longer in France,” Pierre continued, “and if it is, it has no weight. And the people? The people adore the great man, and the people elected him. The people have no prejudice; they have seen the genius and the hero of the greatest in the world.”

“Even if he was a hero for some,” said the Viscount, without answering the young man or even looking at him, but turning to Anna Pavlovna and Prince Andrei, “then after the murder of the Duke there was one more martyr in heaven, one less hero on earth.”

Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to appreciate these words of the Viscount, the unbroken horse was already continuing its funny and unusual treadmill.

“The execution of the Duke of Enghien,” Pierre continued, “was a state necessity, and I see greatness of soul in the fact that Napoleon was not afraid to take upon himself the sole responsibility for this act.

“You approve of murder,” Anna Pavlovna said in a terrible whisper.

“How, Monsieur Pierre, do you see greatness of soul in murder?” said the little princess, smiling and moving the work towards her.

- Ah! Oh! - said different voices.

“Excellent,” Prince Ippolit suddenly said in English and began to hit his knee with his palm. The Viscount only shrugged his shoulders.

"Is it a good or a bad thing to kill a duke?" he said, surprising everyone with his high-toned composure. "One of two things..."

Pierre felt that this dilemma was put to him in such a way that if he answered negatively, he would be forced to renounce his admiration for the hero; if he answered positively, that the deed was good, God knows what would happen to him. He answered positively, not fearing what would happen.

“This act is great, like everything that this great man does,” he said desperately, and paid no attention to the horror expressed on all faces except Prince Andrei’s, and to the contemptuous shrugs of the shoulders; he continued to speak alone, despite the obvious reluctance of the hostess. Everyone, except Prince Andrei, listened to him, exchanging surprised glances. Prince Andrei listened with sympathy and a quiet smile.

"Didn't he know," Pierre continued, "the whole storm that would rise against him for the Duke's death? He knew that he would have to fight again with all of Europe for this one head, and he would fight, and again he would be the winner, because...

“Are you Russian?” Anna Pavlovna asked.

- Russian. But he will win, because he is a great man. The Duke's death was necessary. He is a genius, and a genius differs from ordinary people in that he acts not for himself, but for humanity. The royalists wanted to reignite the internal war and revolution that he had suppressed. He needed internal peace, and by executing the Duke he set such an example that the Bourbons stopped intriguing.

“But, dear Monsieur Pierre,” said Anna Pavlovna, trying to win with meekness, “what do you call intrigues the means to return the legitimate throne?”

“Only the people’s will is legitimate,” he replied, “and it expelled the Bourbons and handed over power to the great Napoleon.

And he looked solemnly over his glasses at the listeners.

- Ah! "The social contract," the Viscount said quietly, apparently calming down and recognizing the source from which his opponent's arguments were drawn.

“And after that?!” Anna Pavlovna exclaimed.

But even after this, Pierre continued his speech just as impolitely.

"No," he said, becoming more and more animated, "the Bourbons and the royalists fled from the revolution, they could not understand it. But this man rose above it, suppressed its abuses, retaining all that was good - both the equality of citizens, and freedom of speech and the press, and only because of this did he acquire power."

“Yes, if he had taken power and given it to the legitimate king,” said the Viscount ironically, “then I would have called him a great man.”

"He could not have done that. The people gave him power only so that he could rid them of the Bourbons, and because the people saw in him a great man. The Revolution itself was a great thing," continued Monsieur Pierre, showing with this desperate and provocative introductory sentence his great youth and his desire to express everything as quickly as possible.

- Revolution and regicide are a great thing?!.. After that...

- I am not talking about the regicide. When Napoleon appeared, the revolution had already done its time, and the nation itself had surrendered itself into his hands. But he understood the ideas of the revolution and became its representative.

“Yes, the ideas of robbery, murder and regicide,” the ironic voice interrupted again.

– These were extremes, of course, but that is not the whole point, but the point is in the rights of man, in emancipation from prejudices, in the equality of citizens; and Napoleon retained all these ideas in all their strength.

“Liberty and equality,” the Viscount said contemptuously, as if he had finally decided to seriously prove to this young man the stupidity of his speeches, “all big words that have long been compromised. Who does not love freedom and equality? Our Savior preached freedom and equality. Have people become happier since the Revolution? On the contrary. We wanted freedom, and Bonaparte is destroying it.”

Prince Andrey, with a cheerful smile, looked now at Monsieur Pierre, now at the Viscount, now at the hostess, and, apparently, consoled himself with this unexpected and indecent episode. At the first moment of Pierre's outburst, Anna Pavlovna was horrified, despite her habit of society, but when she saw that, despite the sacrilegious speeches uttered by Pierre, the Viscount did not lose his temper, and when she was convinced that it was no longer possible to hush up these speeches, she gathered her strength and, joining the Viscount, attacked the orator.

“But, dear Monsieur Pierre,” said Anna Pavlovna, “how do you explain a great man who could execute a duke, finally, just a man, without trial and without guilt?”

"I would like to ask," said the Vicomte, "how Monsieur Pierre explains the 18th Brumaire. Isn't that a fraud? It's a swindle, not at all like the way a great man would act."

"And the prisoners in Africa whom he killed?" the little princess added. "It's terrible." And she shrugged her shoulders.

“He’s a scoundrel, no matter what you say,” said Prince Ippolit.

Monsieur Pierre did not know who to answer, looked around at everyone, smiled and with his smile revealed his irregular black teeth. His smile was not like other people's, merging with the unsmile. On the contrary, when a smile came to him, the serious and even somewhat sullen face suddenly disappeared, and another appeared, childish, kind, even silly and as if asking for forgiveness.

The Viscount, who saw him for the first time, realized that this Jacobin was not nearly as terrible as his words suggested. Everyone fell silent.

- How do you want him to answer everyone all of a sudden? - Prince Andrei's voice responded. - Besides, in the actions of a statesman one must distinguish between the actions of a private individual and those of a military leader or emperor. That's what I think.

“Yes, yes, of course,” Pierre picked up, delighted by the help that had come to him. “As a man, he is great on the Arcole Bridge, in the hospital in Jaffa, where he gives a hand to the plague-stricken, but…”

Prince Andrei, apparently wanting to soften the awkwardness of Pierre’s speech, rose, preparing to leave and giving a sign to his wife.

“It’s difficult to judge modern people,” he said, “but our descendants will appreciate it.”

Suddenly Prince Ippolit stood up and, stopping everyone with his hands and asking them to sit down, he began to speak:

- Today I was told a delightful Moscow joke: I must regale you with it. Excuse me, Viscount, I will tell it in Russian, otherwise the whole point of the joke will be lost.

And Prince Ippolit began to speak Russian with the accent that the French use after spending a year in Russia. Everyone stopped: Prince Ippolit was so animated and insistent in demanding attention to his story.

– There is a lady in Moscow. And she is very stingy. She needed two footmen for a carriage. And very tall. That was her taste. And she had a maid of even greater height. She said…

Here Prince Ippolit began to think, apparently having difficulty thinking.

- She said... yes, she said: "Girl, put on your livery and come with me, behind the carriage, to make visits."

Here Prince Ippolit snorted and burst out laughing much earlier than his listeners, which made an unfavorable impression on the narrator. However, many, including the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, smiled.

- She went. Suddenly a strong wind came. The girl lost her hat, and her long hair came undone...

Here he could no longer hold on and began to laugh abruptly and through this laughter he said:

- And the whole world found out...

That was the end of the joke. Although it was unclear why he was telling it and why it had to be told in Russian, Anna Pavlovna and the others appreciated the social courtesy of Prince Ippolit, who had so pleasantly ended Monsieur Pierre's unpleasant and ungracious behavior. The conversation after the joke fell apart into small, insignificant chatter about the upcoming and past ball, the performance, about when and where they would meet.




VIII


Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her wonderful evening, the guests began to disperse.

Pierre was awkward. Fat, broad, with enormous hands that seemed made to move poods of weight, he, as they say, did not know how to enter a salon and even less how to leave it, that is, how to bow before going out, or say something especially pleasant. In addition, he was absent-minded. When he got up, instead of his hat, he grabbed a triangular hat with a general's plume and held it, tugging at the plume, until the general, as it seemed to Pierre, angrily asked him to return it. But all his absent-mindedness and inability to enter a salon and speak in it were redeemed by such an expression of good nature and simplicity that, despite all his shortcomings, he involuntarily was sympathetic even to those whom he embarrassed. Anna Pavlovna turned to him and, with Christian meekness expressing forgiveness for his outburst, nodded to him and said:

“I hope to see you again, but I also hope that you will change your mind, my dear Monsieur Pierre.”

When she told him this, he said nothing in response, only leaned over and showed everyone his smile once more, which said nothing, except perhaps this: “Opinions are opinions, but you see what a kind and nice fellow I am.” And everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, involuntarily felt this.

“You know, my dear, your reasoning could shatter glass,” said Prince Andrei, fastening his saber.

“They can’t,” said Pierre, lowering his head and looking through his glasses and stopping. “How can one not see in either the revolution or Napoleon anything other than the personal interests of the Bourbons? We ourselves don’t feel how much we owe to the revolution…”

Prince Andrei did not listen to the rest of this speech. He went out into the hall and, putting his shoulders under the footman who was throwing his cloak on him, listened indifferently to the chatter of his wife with Prince Ippolit, who had also come out into the hall. Prince Ippolit stood next to the pretty pregnant princess and stubbornly looked straight at her through his lorgnette.

“Go, Annette, you’ll catch a cold,” said the little princess, saying goodbye to Anna Pavlovna. “It’s decided,” she added quietly.

Anna Pavlovna had already managed to talk with Liza about Anatole’s proposed marriage to her daughter-in-law and asked the princess to act on her husband.

“I’m counting on you, my dear friend,” Anna Pavlovna said quietly, too. “You’ll write to her and tell me how father views the matter. Goodbye,” and she left the hall.

Prince Ippolit came right up to the little princess and, bending his face close to hers, began to say something to her in a half-whisper.

Two footmen, one the princess's, the other his, waiting for them to finish speaking, stood with a shawl and a redingote and listened to their incomprehensible French speech with such faces as if they understood what was being said, but did not want to show it. The princess, as always, spoke, smiling, and listened, laughing.

“I’m very glad that I didn’t go to the envoy,” said Prince Ippolit, “it’s boring… A wonderful evening. Isn’t it wonderful?”

“They say the ball will be very good,” answered the princess, twitching her lip and moustache. “All the beautiful women of society will be there.”

“Not all, because you won’t be there, not all,” said Prince Ippolit, laughing joyfully and, grabbing the shawl from the footman, even pushed him and began to put it on the princess. Whether from awkwardness or intentionally, no one could figure it out, he did not lower his hands for a long time when the shawl was already put on, and seemed to embrace the young woman.

She gracefully, but still smiling, stepped back, turned and looked at her husband. Prince Andrei's eyes were closed, so tired and sleepy did he seem.

“Are you ready?” he asked his wife, looking around at her. Prince Ippolit quickly put on his redingote, which, in the new style, was longer than his heels, and, getting tangled up in it, ran to the porch after the princess, whom the footman was helping into the carriage.

“Princess, goodbye,” he shouted, his tongue getting tangled up as well as his legs.

The princess, picking up her dress, sat down in the darkness of the carriage, her husband adjusted his sabre; Prince Ippolit, under the pretext of being a servant, interfered with everyone.

“Excuse me, sir,” Prince Andrei addressed Prince Ippolit in Russian, who was blocking his way.

This “per-mission, sir” sounded with such cold contempt that Prince Ippolit stepped aside extremely quickly, began to apologize and nervously shift from foot to foot, as if from a fresh, not yet cooled, burning pain.

“I’m waiting for you, Pierre,” Prince Andrei’s voice was heard.

The postilion moved off, and the carriage rattled its wheels. Prince Ippolit laughed abruptly, standing on the porch and waiting for the Viscount, whom he had promised to take home...

"Well, my dear, your little princess is very sweet, very sweet," said the Viscount, getting into the carriage with Ippolit. He kissed the tips of his fingers. "And a perfect Frenchwoman."

Ippolit snorted and laughed.

“You know, you are terrible with your innocent look,” the Viscount continued. “I pity the poor husband, this poor officer who pretends to be a sovereign person.”

Ippolit snorted again and said through his laughter:

- And you said that Russian ladies are worse than French ones. You have to know how to take on things.




IX


Pierre, having arrived ahead, like a man of the house, went into Prince Andrei's study and immediately, out of habit, lay down on the sofa, took the first book he came across from the shelf (it was Caesar's Notes) and, leaning his elbows, began to read them from the middle with such interest as if he had already been reading them for two hours. Prince Andrei, having arrived, went straight to the dressing room and five minutes later came out into the study.

“What have you done to Mrs. Scherer? She’s going to get really sick now,” he said in Russian, coming in to Pierre in a velvet room coat and smiling patronizingly, cheerfully and in a friendly way, rubbing his little white hands, which he had obviously just washed again.

Pierre turned his whole body so that the sofa creaked, and turned his animated face towards Prince Andrei, shaking his head.

Pierre nodded guiltily.

- I only woke up at three. Can you imagine that the five of us drank eleven bottles? (Pierre said you to Prince Andrei, and he said you to him. This had been the case between them since childhood and had not changed.) - Excellent people! What an Englishman! A miracle!

“I have never understood this pleasure,” said Prince Andrey.

- Oh, what are you saying! You are a completely different and amazing person in everything, - Pierre said sincerely.

- Again with dear Anatole Kuragin?

- Yes.

- You don't want to hang out with this scum.

- No, really, he's a nice guy.

- Rubbish! - Prince Andrey said briefly and frowned. - Ippolit is a very smart boy, isn't he? - he added.

Pierre laughed, shaking his entire heavy body so that the sofa creaked again. “There was a lady in Moscow,” he repeated through his laughter.

“You know, he’s really a good fellow,” the prince said intercessorily. “Well, have you finally decided on something? Will you be a cavalry guard or a diplomat?”

Pierre sat down on the sofa, tucking his legs under him.

- You can imagine, I still don't know. I don't like either one.

- But you have to decide on something? Your father is waiting.

At the age of ten, Pierre was sent abroad with his tutor-abbot, where he stayed until he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow, his father dismissed the abbot and said to the young man: “Now you go to Petersburg, look around, make acquaintances and think about your choice of path. I agree to everything. Here is a letter for Prince Vasily, and here is money for you. Write about everything, I will help you with everything.” Pierre had been choosing a career for three months and had done nothing. Prince Andrei had spoken to him about this choice. Pierre rubbed his forehead.

– I understand military service; but explain this to me, – he said. – Why are you – you understand everything – why are you going to this war, against whom? Against Napoleon and France. If this were a war for freedom, I would understand, I would be the first to enlist, but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world… I don’t understand how you are going?

“You see, my dear,” began Prince Andrei, perhaps involuntarily wishing to conceal from himself the vagueness of his thoughts and suddenly beginning in French and changing his previous sincere tone to a cordial and cold one, “one can look at the matter from a completely different point of view.

And he, with such an air as if everything they were talking about was his own business or that of people close to him, explained to Pierre the view that was then current in the highest circles of St. Petersburg society on the political purpose of Russia in Europe at that time.

Europe has suffered from wars since the Revolution. The cause of the wars, apart from Napoleon's ambition, was the irregularity of the European equilibrium. It was necessary for one great power to take up the matter sincerely and impartially and, having formed an alliance, to mark new frontiers for the states and to establish a new European equilibrium and a new national law, by virtue of which war would be impossible and all misunderstandings between states would be resolved by mediation. Russia assumed this disinterested role in the coming war. Russia would strive only to return France to the frontiers of 1796, leaving the French themselves to choose their form of government, as well as to restore the independence of Italy, the Cisalpine Kingdom, a new state of the two Belgiums, a new German Confederation and even to restore Poland.

Pierre listened attentively, several times wanting to enter into an argument, but holding back out of respect for his friend.

“Do you see that this time we are not as stupid as it seems?” concluded Prince Andrey.

- Yes, yes, but why is this plan not proposed to Napoleon himself? - interrupted Pierre. - He would be the first to accept it, if this plan is sincere; he will understand and love every great idea.

Prince Andrei was silent for a moment and rubbed his forehead with his little hand.

“Besides, I’m going…” He stopped. “I’m going because the life I lead here, this life, is not for me!”

“Why?” Pierre asked in surprise.

“Because, my dear,” said Prince Andrei, standing up and smiling, “it is proper for the Viscount and Ippolit to hang around the drawing rooms and talk nonsense and tell tales about Mademoiselle Georges and the ‘girl’, but this role is not suitable for me. I have had enough of it,” he added.

Pierre expressed his agreement with his eyes.

- But here's another thing. What is Kutuzov? And what does it mean to be an adjutant? - asked Pierre with that rare naivety that young people have who are not afraid to reveal their ignorance with a question.

“You alone may not know this,” Prince Andrei answered, smiling and shaking his head. “Kutuzov is Suvorov’s right hand, the best Russian general.”

- But how can you be an adjutant? So, you can be sent?

“Of course, the adjutant’s influence is the most insignificant,” answered Prince Andrei, “but we must begin. Besides, my father wanted this. I will ask Kutuzov to give me a detachment. And then we will see…”

“It must be strange for you to fight Napoleon,” said Pierre, as if he assumed that Prince Andrei, as soon as he arrived at the war, would have to engage, if not in single combat, then in the closest competition with Napoleon.

Prince Andrei smiled thoughtfully to himself, turning the wedding ring on his ring finger with a graceful, feminine gesture.




X


A woman's dress rustled in the next room. As if awakening, Prince Andrei shook himself, and his face assumed the same expression it had had in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre lowered his legs from the sofa. The princess entered. She was already in another, home dress, but equally elegant and fresh. Prince Andrei stood up, politely moving a chair for her, but his face, while he was doing this, expressed such boredom that the princess would have been offended if she had been able to observe.

"Why, I often wonder," she began, as always, in French, "why didn't Annette marry? How stupid you all are, gentlemen, not to have married her. Forgive me, but you don't understand anything about women."

Pierre and Prince Andrey involuntarily exchanged glances and remained silent. But neither their glance nor their silence embarrassed the princess in the least. She continued chatting just as before.

"What a debater you are, Monsieur Pierre," she said to the young man. "What a debater you are, Monsieur Pierre," she repeated, sitting down, as always, hastily and fussily, in the large armchair by the fireplace.

She folded her small hands over the rise of her waist and fell silent, apparently intending to listen. Her face took on that peculiarly serious expression in which the eyes seem to look inward, an expression that only pregnant women have.

“I still argue with your husband: I don’t understand why he wants to go to war,” said Pierre, without any of the embarrassment so common in the relationship of a young man to a young woman, turning to the princess.

The princess perked up. Apparently, Pierre's words had touched her to the quick.

- Ah, that's what I'm saying! - she said with her worldly smile. - I don't understand, I absolutely don't understand, why men can't live without war? Why don't we women want anything, don't we need anything? Well, you be the judge. I keep telling him: here he is an adjutant to his uncle, the most brilliant position... Everyone knows him so well, they value him so much. The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady ask: "Is this the famous Prince Andrei?" Honestly.

She laughed.

- He is so accepted everywhere. He could very easily be an aide-de-camp... You know, the Emperor spoke very kindly to him the other day. Annette and I said: it would be very easy to arrange. What do you think?

Pierre looked at Prince Andrei and, noticing that his friend did not like this conversation, did not answer.

“When are you leaving?” he asked.

“Oh, don’t talk to me about this departure! I don’t want to hear about it,” the princess began to speak in the same capriciously playful tone in which she spoke to Ippolit in the drawing room and which was so obviously not appropriate for the family circle, of which Pierre was, as it were, a member.

– Today, when I thought that I had to break off all these dear relationships... And then, you know, Andrey...

She winked significantly at her husband.

“I’m afraid, I’m afraid!” she whispered, her back shaking.

The husband looked at her as if he were surprised to notice that someone else besides himself and Pierre was in the room; however, with cold politeness he turned to the princess inquiringly:

“What are you afraid of, Lisa? I can’t understand,” he said.

- That's how all men are selfish, all of them, all of them selfish! He himself, because of his whims, God knows why, abandons me, locks me up in the village alone.

“With your father and sister, don’t forget,” Prince Andrey said quietly.

- All alone, without my friends... And she wants me not to be afraid. - Her tone was already grumpy, her lip was rising, giving her face not a joyful, but a bestial, squirrel-like expression. She fell silent, as if she found it indecent to talk about her future birth in front of Pierre, although that was the essence of the matter.

“Still, I don’t understand what you’re afraid of,” Prince Andrei said slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.

The princess blushed and waved her hands desperately.

- No, Andrey, I’m saying: you’ve changed so, so much...

“Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier,” said Prince Andrey. “You should go to bed.”

The princess said nothing, and suddenly her short, mustachioed lip began to tremble; Prince Andrei stood up and, shrugging his shoulders, walked around the room.

Pierre looked through his glasses, surprised and naive, first at one, then at the other, and began to stir, as if he wanted to get up, then was thinking again.

“What does it matter to me that Monsieur Pierre is here?” the little princess suddenly said, and her pretty face suddenly blossomed into a tearful, ugly grimace. “I’ve wanted to tell you for a long time, Andrei: why have you changed so much towards me? What have I done to you? You’re going to the army, you don’t pity me. Why?”

“Liza!” said Prince Andrei, but in these words there was both a request and a threat and, most importantly, an assurance that she herself would repent of her words; but she hurriedly continued:

- You treat me like I'm sick or a child. I see everything. Were you like this six months ago?

“Liza, I ask you to stop,” said Prince Andrey even more expressively.

Pierre, who had become more and more agitated during this conversation, stood up and went up to the princess. It seemed that he could not bear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.

- Calm down, princess. It seems that way to you because, I assure you, I have experienced it myself... why... because... No, excuse me, a stranger is out of place here... No, calm down... Goodbye... forgive me...

And he, bowing, was about to leave. Prince Andrey stopped him by the hand.

- No, wait, Pierre. The princess is so kind that she would not want to deprive me of the pleasure of spending the evening with you.

“No, he only thinks about himself,” said the princess, unable to hold back angry tears.

“Liza,” Prince Andrey said dryly, raising his tone to the point that showed that patience was exhausted.

Suddenly the angry squirrel-like expression of the princess's beautiful face was replaced by an attractive and compassionate expression of fear; she glanced askance at her husband with her beautiful little eyes, and on her face appeared that timid and confessing expression which a dog has when it quickly but weakly wags its lowered tail.

“Oh my God, oh my God!” said the princess, and, picking up a fold of her dress with one hand, she went up to her husband and kissed him on his brown forehead.

“Good night, Liza,” said Prince Andrei, standing up and politely, as if to a stranger, kissing her hand.




XI


The friends were silent. Neither one began to speak. Pierre glanced at Prince Andrey, Prince Andrey rubbed his forehead with his little hand.

“Let’s go have dinner,” he said with a sigh, standing up and heading for the door.

They entered the elegant, newly, richly decorated dining room. Everything, from the napkins to the silver, faience and crystal, bore that special stamp of novelty and elegance that is found in the household of a young married couple. In the middle of the supper, Prince Andrei leaned his elbows and, like a man who has long had something in his heart and suddenly decides to speak out, with an expression of nervous irritation in which Pierre had never before seen his friend, began to speak:

– Never, never marry, my friend, that’s my advice to you, don’t marry until you tell yourself that you’ve done all you could, and until you stop loving the woman you’ve chosen, until you see her clearly, otherwise you’ll make a cruel and irreparable mistake. Marry when you’re an old man, good for nothing… Otherwise, everything that’s good and lofty in you will be lost. Everything will be wasted on trifles. Yes, yes, yes! Don’t look at me with such surprise. If you expect something from yourself in the future, then at every step you’ll feel that everything is over for you, everything is closed, except for the drawing room, where you’ll stand on the same level with a court lackey and an idiot… But what!..

He waved his hand energetically.

Pierre took off his glasses, which changed his face, showing even more kindness, and looked at his friend in surprise.

“My wife,” continued Prince Andrey, “is a wonderful woman. She is one of those rare women with whom one can be at peace for one’s honor; but, my God, what would I not give now not to be married! I am telling this to you alone and first, because I love you.”

Prince Andrey, speaking thus, was even less like the gentleman who lay sprawled in Anna Pavlovna's armchair, and through his teeth, squinting, spoke French phrases. His dry, brownish face was still trembling with a nervous animation of every muscle; his eyes, in which the fire of life had previously seemed extinguished, now shone with a radiant, bright sparkle. It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more energetic he was in these moments of almost painful irritation.

"You don't understand why I say this," he continued. "It's a whole life story. You say Buonaparte and his career," he said, although Pierre was not talking about Buonaparte. "You say Buonaparte, but Buonaparte finished his course at the artillery school and came out into the world when there was a war and the road to glory was open to everyone.

Pierre looked at his friend, apparently ready to agree with whatever he said.

– Buonaparte went out and immediately found the place he was supposed to occupy. And who were his friends? Who was Josephine Beauharnais? My five years of life after leaving the page corps – drawing rooms, balls, love affairs, idleness. Now I am going to war, to the greatest war that has ever been, and I know nothing and am good for nothing. I am polite and caustic, and at Anna Pavlovna’s they listen to me, but I have forgotten what I knew. I have only just begun to read, but all this is irrelevant. And without knowledge of military history, mathematics, fortification there cannot be a military man. And this stupid society, without which my wife cannot live, and these women… I was a success in society. The most refined women threw themselves on my neck. And if only you could know what all these refined women are like, and women in general! My father is right. He says that nature is not wise, because she could not invent a means of propagating the human race without women. Egoism, vanity, stupidity, insignificance in everything - these are women when they show themselves as they are. You look at them in society, it seems that there is something, but nothing, nothing, nothing! Yes, do not marry, my soul, do not marry, - finished Prince Andrei, and shook his head so significantly, as if everything he said was such a truth that no one could doubt it.

“I find it funny,” said Pierre, “that you consider yourself, you consider yourself incapable, that your life is ruined. You have everything, everything ahead of you. And you…”

He didn't say what? you, but his tone already showed how highly he valued his friend and how much he expected from him in the future.

In the best, most friendly and simple relationships, flattery or praise is as necessary as grease is necessary for wheels to run.

“I am a finished man,” said Prince Andrei, but from the high and proudly raised handsome head and the bright sparkle in his eyes it was evident how little he believed in what he was saying. “What is there to talk about me? Let’s talk about you,” he said, after a pause and smiling at his consoling thoughts. This smile was immediately reflected on Pierre’s face.

"And what about me?" said Pierre, opening his mouth into a carefree, cheerful smile. "What am I? I'm an illegitimate son."

And suddenly, for the first time that evening, he blushed crimson. It was obvious that he had made a great effort to say this.

- No name, no fortune. And what, really...

But he didn't say what? Right.

- I'm free for now, and I'm fine. I just don't know what to start. I wanted to seriously consult with you.

Prince Andrey looked at him with kind eyes. But in his gaze, friendly and affectionate, there was still an awareness of his superiority.

- You are dear to me, especially because you are the only living person. Among all our world. You are fine. Choose what you want, it doesn't matter. You will be good everywhere, but one thing: stop going to these Kuragins, to lead this life. It doesn't suit you: all these revelries and hussarism, and that's it.

- You know what, - said Pierre, as if a happy thought had suddenly occurred to him, - seriously, I've been thinking about this for a long time. With this life, I can't decide or think about anything. My head hurts, I have no money. Today he invited me, I won't go.

- Give me your word, your word of honor, that you won’t go?

- Honestly.

- Look.

- Certainly.




XII


It was already one o'clock in the morning when Pierre left his friend's house. It was a June night, a gloomy Petersburg night. Pierre got into a cab with the intention of going home. But the closer he got, the more he felt it was impossible to sleep on this night, which was more like an evening or a morning. You could see far along the empty streets. He imagined the lively, handsome face of Prince Andrei, he heard his words - not about his relationship with his wife (that did not interest Pierre) - but his words about the war and the future that could await his friend. Pierre loved and admired his friend so unconditionally that he could not allow Prince Andrei, as soon as he himself wanted, to be recognized by everyone as a remarkable and great man, who was inclined to command and not to obey. Pierre could not imagine that anyone, Kutuzov for example, would have the courage to give orders to such a man, obviously born for the leading role in everything, as Prince Andrei seemed to him. He imagined his friend in front of the troops, on a white horse, with a short and powerful speech on his lips, he imagined his courage, his successes, his heroism and everything that most young people imagine for themselves. Pierre remembered that he had promised that day to pay off a small card debt to Anatole, at whose usual gambling society was to gather that evening.

“I’m going to see Kuragin,” he said to the coachman, thinking only about where to spend the rest of the night and completely forgetting the word he gave to Prince Andrei not to visit Kuragin.

Having driven up to the porch of the large house near the Horse Guards barracks, where Prince Anatole Kuragin lived, he recalled his promise, but then, as happens with people called spineless, he so passionately wanted to go in and take another look at this dissolute life that was so familiar and boring to him, and the thought involuntarily came to his mind that the given word meant nothing, besides, even before Prince Andrei, he had also given Anatole his word to bring the debt; finally, he thought that all these honest words were such conditional things, having no definite meaning, especially if you consider that perhaps tomorrow either he would die, or something so extraordinary would happen to him that there would no longer be either honest or dishonest.

He went up the lighted porch, up the stairs, and entered the open door. There was no one in the luxurious hallway, empty bottles were lying around, in the corner a pile of bent cards, raincoats, galoshes; it smelled of wine; distant talk and shouting could be heard.

Apparently the game and dinner were over, but the guests had not yet left. Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, where a life-size statue of a racehorse stood in the middle. From the third room he could hear more clearly the bustle and familiar laughter and shouts of six or eight people. He entered the third room, where the remains of the dinner were still standing. About eight young men, all without frock coats and mostly in military breeches, were crowding around the open window and all together shouting incomprehensible words in Russian and French.

“I’ll give you a hundred for Chaplin!” one shouted.

“Look, don’t support!” shouted another.

“I’m for Dolokhov!” shouted the third. “Separate them, Kuragin.”

“With one breath, otherwise it’s lost!” shouted the fourth.

- Yakov, give me the bottle, Yakov! - shouted the owner himself, a tall, stately handsome man, standing in the middle of the crowd. - Stop, gentlemen. Here he is, Pierre!

- Ah! Peter! Petrusha! Peter the Great!

“Peter is fat!” they shouted from all sides, surrounding him.

All the young faces, red and with red spots, expressed joy at the sight of Pierre, who, having taken off his glasses and wiping them, looked at this whole crowd.

“I don’t understand anything. What’s the matter?” he said, smiling good-naturedly.

- Wait, he's not drunk. Give me the bottle, - said Anatole and, taking a glass from the table, went up to Pierre.

- First of all, drink.

Pierre began to drink glass after glass in silence, looking askance at the drunken guests, who had again crowded around the window, talking about something he did not understand. He drank one glass at a gulp; Anatole poured him another with a significant air. Pierre obediently drank it, although more slowly than the first. Anatole poured a third. Pierre drank this one too, although he stopped twice to catch his breath. Anatole stood nearby, looking seriously with his beautiful large eyes alternately at the glass, the bottle and Pierre. Anatole was a handsome man: tall, plump, white, ruddy; his chest was so high that his head was thrown back, which gave him a proud appearance. He had a beautiful fresh mouth, thick blond hair, bulging black eyes and a general expression of strength, health and the good nature of fresh youth. But his beautiful eyes with their marvelous, regular, black eyebrows seemed made not so much for looking as for being looked at. They seemed incapable of changing expression. That he was drunk was evident only from his red face, but still more from his unnaturally protruding chest and the gaping of his eyes. Despite the fact that he was drunk and that the upper part of his powerful body was covered only by a shirt open at the chest, - from the light smell of perfume and soap, which mingled around him with the smell of the wine he had drunk, from the carefully pomaded hairstyle of his hair in the morning, from the elegant cleanliness of his plump hands and the finest linen, from the whiteness and smooth softness of his skin - even in his present state one could see an aristocrat, in the sense of one who has entered into the habit of careful and luxurious care of his person since childhood.

- Well, drink it all! Eh? - he said seriously, handing the last glass to Pierre.

“No, I don’t want to,” said Pierre, stumbling halfway through the glass. “Well, what’s the matter?” he added with the air of a man who has fulfilled his preparatory duties and now considers himself entitled to take part in the general affair.

- Drink it all. Eh? - repeated Anatole, opening his eyes wider, and raised the unfinished glass with his white hand, bare to the elbow. He had the appearance of a man doing something important, because at that moment he was using all his energy to hold the glass straight and say exactly what he wanted to say.

“I say I don’t want to,” Pierre replied, putting on his glasses and walking away. “What are you shouting about?” he asked the crowd gathered at the window.

Anatole stood, thought, gave the glass to the servant and, smiling slightly with his beautiful mouth, also went to the window.

On Fridays Anatole Kuragin received everyone at his place, they played at his place, dined and then spent the night mostly outside the house. That day a long and big game of faro began. Anatole lost a little, and since he had no passion for the game, but played out of habit, he soon fell behind. One rich man, a hussar of the Life Guards, lost a lot, and one Semyonovsky officer, Dolokhov, won against everyone. After the game, they sat down to a very late supper. A very serious Englishman, posing as a traveler, said that he believed, from information that had reached him, that the Russians drank much more than he found in reality. He said that in Russia they only drank champagne, and that if they drank rum, he offered a bet that he would drink more than everyone present. Dolokhov, the officer who had won the most that evening, said that it was not worth betting on a bottle of rum, but that he would drink it without taking it away from his mouth, sitting on a third-story window with his legs hanging out. The Englishman proposed a bet. Anatole accepted the bet for Dolokhov, that is, that Dolokhov would drink the bottle of rum on the window. At the moment when Pierre entered, the footmen were putting up the sash so that they could sit on the outside window sill. The window on the third floor was high enough that anyone who fell from it could kill himself. From various sides, drunken and friendly faces were telling Pierre what was going on, as if they thought that it was of some special importance that Pierre would know the matter.

Dolokhov was an officer in the Guards Infantry Regiment, of medium height, muscular, as if stocky, with a broad and full chest, extremely curly hair and light blue eyes. He was about twenty-five years old. He did not wear a moustache, like all infantry officers, and his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was completely visible. This mouth was extremely pleasant, despite the fact that it almost never smiled. The lines of this mouth were remarkably finely curved. In the middle, the upper lip energetically descended onto the strong lower; a sharp wedge at the corners constantly formed something like two smiles, one on each side, and all together, combined with a direct, somewhat impudent, but fiery and intelligent look, made such an impression that, passing by this face, it was impossible not to notice it and not ask who this owner of such a beautiful and strange face was. Women liked Dolokhov, and he was sincerely convinced that there are no perfect women. Dolokhov was a young man of good family, but not rich; however, he lived luxuriously and gambled constantly. He almost always won; but no one, even in his absence, dared to attribute his constant success to anything other than luck, a clear head, and unshakable willpower. In his heart, everyone who played with him assumed that he was a sharper, although he did not dare say so. Now that he had started his strange bet, the drunken company took a particularly lively part in his plan. And precisely because those who knew him knew that what he said would be done. Pierre knew this too, and therefore only greeted Dolokhov and did not try to object to his plan.

The rest of the company consisted of three officers, an Englishman who had been seen in Petersburg in the most varied societies, one Muscovite gambler, a married fat man who was much older than everyone else, but was nevertheless on first-name terms with all these young people.

A bottle of rum was brought in; the frame, which did not allow one to sit on the outer slope of the window, was being broken down by two footmen in ankle boots and caftans, apparently in a hurry and timid from the advice and shouts of the gentlemen surrounding them.

Anatole, with his chest bulging, without changing his expression, without going around or asking anyone to step aside, pushed his strong body through the crowd at the window, went up to the frame and, wrapping both white hands in the frock coat that was lying on the sofa, hit the glass and broke through it.

“Well, your Excellency,” said the footman, “you’re only getting in the way and cutting your hands.”

- Go, you fool, huh?.. - said Anatole, took hold of the crossbars of the frame and began to pull. Several hands also took up the task; they pulled, and the frame jumped out of the window with a crash, so that those pulling almost fell.

“Get out of here, or they’ll think I’m holding on,” said Dolokhov.

“Listen,” Anatole said to Pierre. “Do you understand? The Englishman is bragging… eh?.. nationality… eh?.. good?..

“Okay,” said Pierre, looking with bated breath at Dolokhov, who, taking a bottle of rum in his hands, was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky and the morning and evening dawns merging on it could be seen. Dolokhov, rolling up his shirt sleeves for some reason, with a bottle of rum in his hand, deftly jumped onto the window.

“Listen!” he shouted, standing on the windowsill and turning into the room.

Everyone fell silent.

“I’ll bet you” (he spoke French so that the Englishman could understand him, and he didn’t speak the language very well) “I’ll bet you fifty imperials… Would you like a hundred?” he added, turning to the Englishman.

“No, fifty,” said the Englishman.

- Okay, for fifty imperials, - that I'll drink the whole bottle of rum without taking it from my mouth, I'll drink it sitting outside the window, right here (he bent down and showed the sloping ledge of the wall outside the window), - and not holding on to anything... Right?..

“Very good,” said the Englishman.

Anatole turned to the Englishman and, taking him by the button of his tailcoat and looking down at him (the Englishman was short in stature), began to explain to him in English what was already clear to everyone.

- Wait! - shouted Dolokhov, banging the bottle on the window to attract attention. - Wait, Kuragin, listen. If anyone does the same, I'll pay a hundred imperials. Do you understand?

The Englishman nodded his head, giving no indication whether he intended to accept this new bet or not. Anatole did not let the Englishman go, and although the latter nodded to indicate that he understood everything, Anatole translated Dolokhov's words to him in English. A young, thin boy, a hussar of the Life Guards, who had lost all his money that evening, climbed up to the window, leaned out and looked down.

“Ooo…” he said, looking out the window at the stone sidewalk.

“Attention!” Dolokhov shouted and pulled the officer out of the window, who, entangled in his spurs, awkwardly jumped into the room.

Having placed the bottle on the windowsill so that it would be easy to get at it, Dolokhov, carefully and quietly, climbed into the window. Lowering his legs and bracing both hands on the edges of the window, he took aim, sat down, let go of his hands, moved to the right, to the left and got the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and placed them on the windowsill, although it was already quite light. Dolokhov's back in a white shirt and his curly head were illuminated from both sides. Everyone crowded around the window. The Englishman stood in front. Pierre smiled and said nothing. The old Muscovite with a frightened and angry face suddenly moved forward and wanted to grab Dolokhov by the shirt.

“Gentlemen, this is nonsense, he will kill himself,” he said.

Anatole stopped him.

- Don't touch him, you'll scare him, he'll kill himself. Huh?.. What then?.. Huh?..

Dolokhov turned around, straightening himself and again spreading his arms. His face was neither pale nor red, but cold and angry.

"If anyone else tries to come near me," he said, rarely letting words pass through his thin, clenched lips, "I'll send them down here right now. It's already slippery, you roll down, and here they come with nonsense... Well!..

Having said "Well," he turned again, let go of his hands, took the bottle and raised it to his mouth, threw his head back and raised his free hand upward to balance it. One of the footmen, who had begun to pick up the glass, stopped in a bent position, not taking his eyes off the window and Dolokhov's back. Anatole stood straight, his eyes wide open. The Englishman, with his lips thrust forward, looked sideways. The old Muscovite ran into the corner of the room and lay down on the sofa, facing the wall. Some stood with their mouths open, some with their hands raised. Pierre covered his face, and a faint smile, forgotten, remained on his face, although it now expressed horror and fear. Everyone was silent. Pierre took his hands away from his eyes; Dolokhov was still sitting in the same position, only his head was bent back so that the curly hair on the back of his head touched the collar of his shirt and the hand with the bottle rose higher and higher, shuddering and making an effort. The bottle was apparently emptying and at the same time rising, bending its head. “What’s taking so long?” thought Pierre. It seemed to him that more than half an hour had passed. Suddenly Dolokhov moved his back, and his hand began to tremble nervously; this tremor was enough to shift his entire body, which was sitting on the sloping slope. He shifted completely, his hands and head began to tremble even more violently, making an effort. One hand rose to grab the windowsill, but fell again. Pierre closed his eyes again and told himself that he would never open them again. Suddenly he felt everything around him stir. He looked: Dolokhov was standing on the windowsill, his face was pale and cheerful.

- Empty!

He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it deftly. Then Dolokhov jumped from the window. He smelled strongly of rum.

- Huh? How is it? Huh?.. - Anatole asked everyone. - It's a great thing!

- The devil take you! - said the old Muscovite. The Englishman took out his wallet and counted out the money. Dolokhov frowned and said nothing. Pierre, looking confused, walked around the room, smiling and breathing heavily.

- Gentlemen, who wants to bet with me? I'll do the same, - he suddenly spoke. - And there's no need for a bet, that's what. Order a bottle.

I'll do it... tell me to give it.

- What are you doing? Are you crazy? Who will let you in? Your head is spinning even on the stairs, - they started talking from different sides.

"It's mean that we left Dolokhov alone to sacrifice his life. I'll drink, give me a bottle of rum!" Pierre shouted, striking the table with a decisive and drunken gesture, and climbed out the window. They grabbed him by the arms and led him into another room. But Dolokhov could not walk; they carried him to the sofa and poured cold water on his head.

Some wanted to go home, some suggested not going home, but going somewhere else together: Pierre insisted more than anyone else on going. They put on their raincoats and went. The Englishman went home, and Dolokhov fell into a half-dead, senseless sleep on Anatole's sofa.




XIII


Prince Vasily fulfilled the promise he had given to an elderly lady at Anna Pavlovna's party, who had asked him about her only son Boris. The Emperor was informed about him, and, unlike others, he was transferred to the Semenovsky Guards Regiment as an ensign. But Boris was never appointed an adjutant or a member of Kutuzov's staff, despite all the efforts and intrigues of Anna Mikhailovna. Soon after Anna Pavlovna's party, Anna Mikhailovna returned to Moscow, straight to her wealthy relatives, the Rostovs, with whom she was stationed in Moscow and with whom her beloved Borenka, who had just been promoted to the army and immediately transferred to the guards ensign, had been raised and lived for years. The guards had already left Petersburg on August 10, and her son, who had stayed behind in Moscow to get his uniform, was supposed to catch up with her on the way to Radzivilov.

The Rostovs had Natalya's birthday girls - the mother and the youngest daughter. Since the morning, incessantly, the carriages arrived and departed, bringing congratulators to the large house of Countess Rostova on Povarskaya, known throughout Moscow. The Countess with her eldest daughter and the guests, who incessantly replaced one another, were sitting in the drawing room. The Countess was a woman with an oriental type of thin face, about forty-five years old, apparently exhausted by children, of whom she had twelve. The slowness of her movements and speech, resulting from her weakness, gave her a significant appearance that inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikhailovna Drubetskaya, as a domestic, sat right there, helping in the matter of receiving and engaging in conversation with the guests. The young people were in the back rooms, not finding it necessary to participate in the reception of visitors. The Count met and saw off the guests, inviting everyone to dinner.

- I am very, very grateful to you, my dear or my dear (he said ma chPre or mоn cher to everyone without exception, without the slightest nuance, both to those above and below him) for myself and for the dear birthday girls. Just watch, come and dine. You will offend me, my dear. I sincerely ask you on behalf of the whole family, my dear.

These words, with the same expression on his full, cheerful, and clean-shaven face, and with the same firm handshake and repeated short bows, he said to everyone without exception and change. Having seen one guest off, the count would return to the drawing room to the one or the other who was still there; having drawn up his chairs and with the air of a man who loved and knew how to live, jauntily spreading his legs and putting his hands on his knees, he would sway significantly, offer guesses about the weather, ask about health, sometimes in Russian, sometimes in very bad, but self-confident French, and again with the air of a tired, but firm in the performance of his duties man, he would go to see them off, straightening the sparse gray hairs on his bald head, and again call them to dinner. Sometimes, returning from the hall, he would go through the flower shop and the waiters' room into the large marble hall, where a table was set for eighty covers, and, looking at the waiters carrying silver and china, pushing the tables apart and unfolding damask tablecloths, he would call over Dmitry Vasilyevich, the nobleman who was in charge of all his affairs, and say:

- Well, well, Mitenka, see that everything is fine. So, so, - he said, looking with pleasure at the huge extended table. - And don't forget to keep the wines in order; the main thing is the table setting. That's it... - And he left, sighing smugly, again into the living room.

“Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!” the countess’s huge footman reported in a bass voice as he entered the drawing room doors.

The Countess thought for a moment and took a sniff from a golden snuffbox with a portrait of her husband.

"These visits are wearing me out," she said. "Well, I'll see her for the last time. She's very prim. Ask her," she said to the footman in a sad voice, as if saying, "Well, finish her off."

A tall, plump lady with a proud look, with her pretty daughter, rustling her dresses, entered the living room.

- Dear Countess, how long ago... she had to lie in bed, poor child... at the Razumovskys' ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so happy.

Lively female voices were heard, interrupting one another and merging with the rustling of dresses and the moving of chairs. The conversation began, which is started just long enough to stand up at the first pause, rustle dresses, say: "I am delighted!" - and, rustling dresses again, go into the hall, put on a fur coat or raincoat and leave.

The conversation turned to the main city news of that time, the illness of the famous rich and handsome man of Catherine's time, old Count Bezukhov, and his illegitimate son Pierre, who behaved so indecently at the evening party at Anna Pavlovna Scherer's.

“I feel very sorry for the poor Count,” said the guest, “his health was already bad, and now this grief from his son. It will kill him!”

“What is it?” asked the Countess, as if she did not know what her guest was talking about, although she had already heard the reason for Count Bezukhov’s disappointment fifteen times.

- This is the modern upbringing! Even abroad, - the guest continued, - this young man was left to his own devices, and now in Petersburg, they say, he has done such horrors that he was expelled from there by the police.

“Tell me!” said the Countess.

- He chose his acquaintances poorly, - Princess Anna Mikhailovna intervened. - The son of Prince Vasily, he and one Dolokhov, they say they did God knows what. And they both suffered. Dolokhov was demoted to a soldier, and Bezukhov's son was exiled to Moscow. Anatoly Kuragin - his father somehow hushed him up. He still remained in the cavalry regiment.

“What did they do?” asked the Countess.

- They are complete robbers, especially Dolokhov, - said the guest. - He is the son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a respectable lady, and what happened? Can you imagine, the three of them got hold of a bear somewhere, put it in a carriage with them and took it to the actresses. The police came running to calm them down. They caught a police officer and tied him back to back to the bear, and released the bear into the Moika; the bear swims, and the police officer on it.

“The policeman’s figure is fine, my dear,” cried the count, dying with laughter, with such an approving look that, despite his age, he would not have refused to take part in such entertainment.

- Oh, what horror! What's there to laugh about, Count?

But the ladies couldn't help but laugh themselves.

- It was with great difficulty that we saved this unfortunate man, - the guest continued. - And this is the son of Prince Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov amusing himself so cleverly! - she added. - And they said that he was so well-bred and clever. That's where all his foreign education led him. I hope that no one will accept him here, despite his wealth. They wanted to introduce him to me. I resolutely refused: I have daughters.

- However, this is a great thing, my dear. Well done! - said the count, unable to restrain his laughter.

The guest looked at him primly and angrily.

- Ah, my dear Marya Lvovna, - he said in his bad French accent and language, - youth must get over its rage. Really! - he added. - And your husband and I were not saints. We also had our sins.

And he winked at her; the guest did not respond.

"Why do you say that this young man is so rich?" asked the Countess, bending away from the girls, who immediately pretended not to listen. "After all, he only has illegitimate children. It seems... Pierre is also illegitimate."

The guest waved her hand.

- He has twenty illegal ones, I think.

Princess Anna Mikhailovna intervened in the conversation, apparently wanting to show off her connections and her knowledge of all social circumstances.

“That’s the thing,” she said significantly, also in a half-whisper. “Count Kirill Vladimirovich’s reputation is well known… He lost count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite.”

“How handsome he was,” said the Countess, “even last year! I have never seen a more handsome man.”

- Now it has changed a lot, - said Princess Anna Mikhailovna. - That's what I wanted to say, - she continued, - Prince Vasily is the direct heir to the entire estate through his wife, but Pierre's father loved him very much, was involved in his upbringing and wrote to the sovereign... So no one knows, if he dies (he is so ill that they expect it any minute, and Lorrain has arrived from Petersburg), who will get this enormous fortune, Pierre or Prince Vasily. Forty thousand souls and millions. I know this very well, because Prince Vasily himself told me so. And Kirill Vladimirovich is my second cousin on my mother's side, and he baptized Borya, - she added, as if not ascribing any significance to this circumstance.

- Prince Vasily arrived in Moscow yesterday. He is going to conduct an inspection, I was told, - said the guest.

“Yes, but between you and me,” said the princess, “it’s a pretext; he actually came to see Prince Kirill Vladimirovich after learning that he was so ill.”

“However, my dear, it’s a fine thing,” said the count, and noticing that the eldest guest was not listening to him, he turned to the young ladies. “The policeman had a fine figure, I imagine.”

And he, imagining how the policeman waved his arms, laughed again with that ringing and bass laugh that shook his entire plump body, the way people laugh who have always eaten well and especially drunk well.




XIV


There was silence. The Countess looked at her guest, smiling pleasantly, but not hiding the fact that she would not be at all upset if the guest got up and left. The guest's daughter was already straightening her dress, looking questioningly at her mother, when suddenly from the next room there was the sound of several male and female feet running towards the door, the clatter of a chair being caught and knocked over, and a thirteen-year-old girl ran into the room, wrapping herself in a short muslin skirt, and stopped in the middle of the room. It seemed that she had accidentally, with an uncalculated run, run so far. At that very moment four creatures appeared in the doorway: two young men, one a student with a crimson collar, the other a guards officer, a fifteen-year-old girl, and a fat, ruddy boy in a child's blouse.

The Count jumped up and, swaying, spread his arms wide around the girl who had run in.

- Ah, here she is! - he cried, laughing. - The birthday girl! My dear birthday girl!

"My dear, there is time for everything," said the Countess to her daughter, evidently only in order to say something, for it was immediately evident that her daughter was not at all afraid of her. "You spoil her all the time," she added to her husband.

"Good morning, my dear, I congratulate you," said the guest. "What a lovely child!" she added, turning flatteringly to the mother.

The black-eyed, big-mouthed, plain but lively girl, with her childish, bare shoulders, which, shrinking, moved in their bodice from running fast, with her black curls thrown back, her thin bare arms and small, quick feet in lace pantaloons and open shoes, was at that sweet age when a girl is no longer a child, and a child is not yet a girl. Turning away from her father, she, quick, graceful and, apparently, not accustomed to the drawing room, ran up to her mother and, paying no attention to her stern remark, hid her flushed face in the lace of her mother's mantilla and laughed.

- Mom! We married Boris... ha ha!.. to a doll... ha ha! Yes... ah... Mimi... - she said through her laughter, - and... ah... he ran away.

And she took out from under her skirt and showed a large doll with a black, worn-out nose, a cracked cardboard head and a kid bottom, legs and arms that dangled at the knees and elbows, but still with a fresh, carmine, exquisite smile and arched, blackest eyebrows.

The Countess had known this Mimi, Natasha’s constant friend, given to her by her godfather, for five years already.

- Do you see?.. - And Natasha could not speak any more (everything seemed funny to her). She fell on her mother and burst out laughing so loudly and sonorously that everyone, even the prim guest, laughed against their will. And this laughter could be heard in the servants' room. Smiling, the Countess's footmen exchanged glances with the visiting liveried footman, who until then had been sitting gloomily on a chair.

- Well, go, go with your freak! - said the mother, pretending to push her daughter away angrily. - This is my youngest, spoiled girl, as you see, - she turned to the guest.

Natasha, tearing her face away from her mother’s lace headscarf for a moment and looking at her from below, quietly, through tears of laughter, said:

“I’m ashamed, Mom.” The guest, forced to admire the family scene, considered it necessary to take some part in it.

“Tell me, my dear,” she said, turning to Natasha, “how do you relate to this Mimi? Your daughter, right?”

Natasha didn’t like the guest and the tone with which she condescended to childish conversation.

“No, madam, this is not my daughter, this is a doll,” she said, smiling boldly, stood up from her mother and sat down next to her older sister, showing that she, too, could behave like a big girl.

Meanwhile, this entire young generation: Boris, an officer, the son of Princess Anna Mikhailovna, Nikolai, a student, the eldest son of the count, Sonya, the fifteen-year-old niece of the count, and little Petrusha, the youngest son, all, as if suddenly lowered into cold water, settled down in the drawing room and, apparently, tried to keep within the bounds of decency the animation and gaiety that still breathed in every feature of them. It was evident that there, in the back rooms, from where they all ran so quickly, they had more cheerful conversations than here about city gossip, the weather and Countess Apraksina.

Two young men, a student and an officer, friends since childhood, were the same age and both handsome, but not alike. Boris was a tall, fair-haired youth, with regular, fine features on a rather longish face. A calm and attentive mind was expressed in his pleasant grey eyes, and at the corners of his still unshaven lips there was always a mocking and slightly sly smile, which not only did no harm, but seemed to add salt to the expression of his fresh, apparently untouched by vice or grief, handsome face. Nikolai was short in stature, broad-chested, and very finely and well built. His open face, with soft, curly, fair hair around a broad, convex forehead, and an ecstatic look in his half-closed, brown, bulging eyes, always expressed the impression of the moment. Black hairs had already appeared on his upper lip, and his whole face expressed swiftness and ecstasy. Both young men bowed and sat down in the drawing room. Boris did it easily and freely; Nikolai, on the contrary, with an almost childish malice. Nikolai glanced now at the guests, now at the door, apparently not wishing to hide the fact that he was bored here, and almost without answering the questions that the guests asked him. Boris, on the contrary, immediately found himself and told sedately, humorously, how he had known this Mimi doll when she was still a young girl, with an unspoiled nose, how she had aged in his memory at the age of five and how her head had cracked all over her skull. Then he asked the lady about her health. Everything he said was simple and decent - neither clever nor stupid - but the smile that played on his lips showed that, in speaking, he did not attribute any value to his words, but spoke only out of decency.

- Mom, why is he talking like a big boy? I don't want to, - Natasha said, approaching her mother and, like a capricious child, pointing at Boris. Boris smiled at her.

“You would always play dolls with him,” Princess Anna Mikhailovna answered her, patting her bare shoulder, which nervously shuddered and hid in her bodice at the touch of Anna Mikhailovna’s hand.

“I’m bored,” Natasha whispered. “Mama, nanny’s asking to come over, can she? Can she?” she repeated, raising her voice, with the quick thinking ability characteristic of women for an innocent deception. “Yes, Mama!” she shouted, barely holding back her laughter and glancing at Boris, she curtsied to the guests and went out to the door, and ran behind the door as fast as her quick legs could carry her. Boris thought about it.

- You seemed to want to go too, maman? Do you need a carriage? - he said, blushing and turning to his mother.

"Yes, go, go, order them to prepare," she said, smiling. Boris quietly went out the door and followed Natasha; the fat boy in the blouse ran angrily after them, as if annoyed by some disturbance that had occurred in his studies.




XV


Of the young people, not counting the Countess's eldest daughter, who was four years older than her sister and already behaved like a grown-up, and the young lady guests, Nikolai and Sonya, the niece, remained in the drawing room, who sat with that somewhat feigned festive smile with which many grown-up people consider it necessary to be present at other people's conversations, and constantly glanced tenderly at her cousin. Sonya was a thin, miniature brunette, with a soft look shaded by long eyelashes, a thick black braid that wound twice around her head, and a yellowish tint to the skin on her face and especially on her bare, thin, but graceful, muscular arms and neck. With the smoothness of her movements, the softness and flexibility of her small limbs and her somewhat cunning and reserved manner, she involuntarily reminded one of a beautiful, but not yet fully formed kitten, who will become a charming cat. She apparently considered it proper to show her participation in the general conversation with her festive smile, but, against her will, her eyes from under her long, thick eyelashes looked at her cousin leaving for the army with such girlish, passionate adoration that her smile could not deceive anyone for a moment, and it was clear that the cat sat down only in order to jump even more energetically and play with her cousin as soon as they got out of this living room.

- Yes, my dear, - said the old count, turning to his guest and pointing to his Nikolai. - Here is his friend Boris, promoted to officer, and out of friendship he does not want to lag behind him, he leaves both the university and me, an old man, and goes into military service. And a place in the archives was already ready for him and that's it. What friendship?! - said the count questioningly.

“Yes, they say war has been declared,” said the guest.

“They’ve been talking about it for a long time,” said the Count, still vaguely. “They’ll talk and talk again, and then leave it that way. What friendship!” he repeated. “He’s going to the hussars.”

The guest, not knowing what to say, shook her head.

“Not out of friendship at all,” Nikolai replied, flushing and making excuses, as if from a shameful slander against him. “Not out of friendship at all, but I simply feel a calling to military service.”

He looked back at the young lady guest: the young lady looked at him with a smile, approving of the young man’s actions.

- Today Schubert, Colonel of the Pavlograd Hussar Regiment, is dining with us. He was here on leave and is taking it with him. What to do? - said the Count, shrugging his shoulders and speaking jokingly about the matter, which had apparently cost him much grief.

Nikolai suddenly became heated for some reason.

"I already told you, papa, that if you don't want to let me go, I'll stay. I know that I'm no good for anything except military service, I'm not a diplomat, I can't hide what I feel," he said, gesticulating too enthusiastically for his words and still glancing with the coquetry of beautiful youth at Sonya and the young lady guest.

The little cat, gazing at him with her eyes, seemed ready at any moment to play and show all her feline nature. The young lady continued to approve with a smile.

“And maybe something will come of me,” he added, “but I’m no good here…”

“Well, well, well!” said the old Count. “Everyone is getting excited. Buonaparte has turned everyone’s heads; everyone is wondering how he got from being a lieutenant to being an emperor. Well, God grant it,” he added, not noticing the mocking smile of his guest.

“Well, go, go, Nikolai, I can see you’re looking into the forest,” said the Countess.

“Not at all,” answered the son; however, a minute later he stood up, bowed, and left the room.

Sonya sat for a little while longer, smiling more and more falsely, and with the same smile she stood up and left.

- How the secrets of all these young people are sewn with white thread! - said Princess Anna Mikhailovna, pointing at Sonya and laughing. The guest laughed.

“Yes,” said the Countess, after the ray of sunshine that had entered the drawing room with this young generation had disappeared, and as if answering a question that no one had ever asked her, but which had constantly occupied her mind. “How much suffering, how much anxiety,” she continued, “has been endured in order to now rejoice in them. And even now, really, there is more fear than joy. One is always afraid, always afraid! Precisely that age when there are so many dangers for both girls and boys.”

“It all depends on upbringing,” said the guest.

“Yes, you are right,” the Countess continued. “Until now, thank God, I have been a friend to my children and enjoy their complete confidence,” the Countess said, repeating the error of many parents who believe that their children have no secrets from them. “I know that I will always be my daughters’ first confidant and that Nikolenka, with his fiery character, if he is naughty (a boy cannot do without it), then everything is not like these Petersburg gentlemen.”

- Yes, fine, fine fellows, - confirmed the Count, who always resolved questions that were confusing to him by finding everything fine. - Well, look! He wanted to be a hussar! What do you want, my dear?

“What a sweet creature your youngest is,” said the guest, looking back reproachfully at her daughter, as if impressing upon her daughter with this look that this is what you have to be like to be liked, and not a doll like you. “Gunpowder!”

“Yes, gunpowder,” said the count.

- She takes after me! And what a voice, talent! Even though she is my daughter, I will tell you the truth, she will be a singer, a different Salomoni. We took an Italian to teach her.

- Isn't it too early? They say it's bad for your voice to study at this time.

“Oh no, how early!” said the Count.

“And how did our mothers get married at twelve, thirteen years old?” added Princess Anna Mikhailovna.

"She's in love with Boris now, isn't she?" said the Countess, smiling quietly, looking at Boris's mother and, apparently answering the thought that had always occupied her, she continued: "Well, you see, if I were to keep her strictly, if I were to forbid her... God knows what they would do quietly (the Countess understood that they would kiss), but now I know her every word. She herself will come running in the evening and tell me everything. Maybe I'm spoiling her, but, really, it seems better this way. I kept the eldest strictly."

“Yes, I was brought up quite differently,” said the eldest, beautiful Countess Vera, smiling. But the smile did not decorate Vera’s face, as usually happens; on the contrary, her face became unnatural and therefore unpleasant. The eldest Vera was pretty, she was smart, she was well-bred. She had a pleasant voice. What she said was fair and appropriate, but, strangely enough, everyone, both the guest and the Countess, looked at her, as if they were surprised why she said it, and felt awkward.

“They always play tricks with older children, they want to do something unusual,” said the guest.

- What's the point of hiding it, my dear! The Countess was being clever with Vera, - said the Count. - Well, so what! She turned out fine after all.

And he, with that instinct which is more penetrating than the mind, approached Vera, noticing that she was uncomfortable, and caressed her with his hand.

“Excuse me, I have to make arrangements for something. You stay a little longer,” he added, bowing and getting ready to leave.

The guests got up and left, promising to come back for dinner.

- What a manner! Oh, how we sat and sat! - said the Countess, seeing the guests off.




XVI


When Natasha left the living room and ran, she only reached the flower shop. In this room she stopped, listening to the conversation in the living room and waiting for Boris to come out. She was already beginning to get impatient and, stamping her foot, was about to cry because he was not coming now. When she heard the not quiet, but fast, decent steps of the young man, the thirteen-year-old girl quickly rushed between the flower pots and hid.

- Boris Nikolaich! - she said in a bass voice, frightening him, and immediately laughed. Boris saw her, shook his head and smiled.

"Boris, come here," she said with a significant and cunning look. He approached her, making his way between the tubs.

"Boris! Kiss Mimi," she said, smiling roguishly and holding out the doll.

“Why not kiss her?” he said, moving closer and not taking his eyes off Natasha.

- No, say: I don’t want to.

She pulled away from him.

- Well, you could say I don't want to. What's so funny about kissing a doll?

- You don't want to? Well, then come here, - she said and then went deeper into the flowers and threw the doll onto the flowerpot. - Closer, closer! - she whispered. She caught the officer by the cuffs with her hands, and solemnity and fear were visible in her flushed face.

“Do you want to kiss me?” she whispered barely audibly, looking at him from under her brows, smiling and almost crying from excitement.

Boris blushed.

"How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her, blushing even more, but doing nothing and waiting. A barely noticeable mockery still fluttered on his lips, ready to disappear.

She suddenly jumped up on the tub, so that she became taller than him, embraced him with both arms, so that her thin bare arms bent above his neck, and, throwing back her hair with a movement of her head, kissed him right on the lips.

"Oh, what have I done!" she cried, laughing as she slipped between the pots to the other side of the flowers, her nimble little feet creaking quickly towards the nursery. Boris ran after her and stopped her.

“Natasha,” he said, “can I call you ‘you’?”

She nodded her head.

"I love you," he said slowly. "You're not a child. Natasha, do what I ask you to do.

- What will you ask me for?

- Please, let's not do what we're doing now for another four years.

Natasha stopped and thought.

- Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen... - she said, counting on her thin fingers. - Good! So it's over? - And a serious smile of joy lit up her lively, though unattractive face.

“It’s finished!” said Boris.

- Forever? - said the girl. - Until death?

And she, taking his arm, quietly walked with him into the nursery. Boris's handsome, delicate face flushed, and the mocking expression on his lips completely disappeared. He straightened his chest and sighed happily, complacently. His eyes seemed to look far into the future, four years ahead, into the happy year 1809.

The young people gathered again in the nursery, where they liked to sit most of all.

"No, you won't leave!" shouted Nikolai, who did and spoke everything passionately and impulsively, grabbing Boris by the sleeve of his uniform with one hand and taking his hand away from his sister with the other. "You are obliged to get married."

“I must, I must!” both girls cried.

“I’ll be a deacon, Nikolaenka,” cried Petrusha. “Please, I’ll be a deacon. ‘Lord, have mercy!’”

It would seem incomprehensible that the young men and women could find anything cheerful in the wedding of the doll with Boris, but one had only to look at the triumph and joy depicted on all faces, while the doll, decorated with orange flowers and in a white dress, was placed on a peg with its kid backside, and Boris, who agreed to everything, was led to her, and how little Petrusha, having put on a skirt, imagined himself a deacon - one had only to look at all this, so that, even without understanding this joy, one could share it.

While the bride was dressing, Nikolai and Boris were kicked out of the room for decency's sake. Nikolai walked around the room in agitation and silently gasped and shrugged his shoulders.

“What’s wrong with you?” Boris asked.

He looked at his friend and waved his hand desperately.

“Oh, you don’t know what just happened to me!” he said, clutching his head.

“What?” Boris asked mockingly and calmly.

- Well, I’m leaving, and she… No, I can’t say!

- What about it? - repeated Boris. - With Sonya?

- Yes. You know what?

- What?

- Oh, that's amazing! What do you think? Am I obliged to tell my father everything after this?

- What?

- You know, I don’t know how it happened, I kissed Sonya today; I behaved badly. But what should I do? I’m madly in love. And is it bad of me? I know it’s bad… What do you say?

Boris smiled.

- What are you saying? Really? - he asked with sly and mocking surprise. - And kissed me on the lips? When?

- Yes, right now. You wouldn't do it? Huh? You wouldn't? Was I wrong?

- Well, I don't know. It all depends on what your intentions are.

- Well! Of course. It's true. I told her. As soon as I'm promoted to officer, I'll marry her.

“It’s amazing,” repeated Boris. “How determined you are!”

Nikolai, having calmed down, laughed.

- I wonder why you have never been in love and no one has ever fallen in love with you.

“That’s my character,” said Boris, blushing.

- Well, you are cunning! Vera is telling the truth. - Nikolai suddenly began to tickle his friend.

- And you are desperate. Vera is telling the truth. - And Boris, who was afraid of tickling, pushed away his friend's hands. - You will do something extraordinary.

Both of them, laughing, returned to the girls to perform the wedding ceremony.




XVII


The Countess was so tired of visiting that she gave orders to receive no more guests, and the doorman was only ordered to call everyone who would come with congratulations to eat. In addition, she wanted to have a private talk with her childhood friend, Princess Anna Mikhailovna, whom she had not seen well since her arrival from Petersburg. Anna Mikhailovna, with her tear-stained and pleasant face, moved closer to the Countess's chair.

"I'll be completely frank with you," said Anna Mikhailovna. "There are so few of us old friends left. That's why I value your friendship so much."

The princess looked at Vera and stopped. The countess shook her friend's hand.

“Vera,” said the Countess, turning to her eldest daughter, who was obviously unloved. “How tactless you are for anything. Don’t you feel that you are superfluous here? Go to your sisters or…”

Beautiful Vera smiled, apparently not feeling the slightest insult, and went into her room. But, passing by the nursery, she noticed that there were two couples sitting symmetrically by the two windows. Sonya was sitting close to Nikolai, who, with a flushed face, was reading her poetry, which he had written for the first time. Boris and Natasha were sitting by the other window and were silent. Boris was holding her hand and let it go when Vera appeared. Natasha picked up a box of gloves standing next to her and began to sort through them. Vera smiled. Nikolai and Sonya looked at her, stood up and left the room.

"Natasha," Vera said to her younger sister, who was carefully sorting through the scented gloves. "Why are Nikolai and Sonya running away from me? What secrets do they have?"

- Well, what is it to you, Vera? - Natasha said in a thin voice, intercessory, continuing her work. She was apparently even more kind and affectionate to everyone than usual from happiness.

“It’s very stupid of them,” Vera said in a tone that seemed offensive to Natasha.

"Everyone has their own secrets. Berg and I won't touch you," she said, getting heated.

- How stupid! I'll tell Mommy how you treat Boris. It's not good.

Boris stood up and bowed politely to Vera.

"Natalya Ilinishna treats me very well. I can't complain," he said mockingly.

Natasha didn't laugh and raised her head.

“Come on, Boris, you’re such a diplomat (the word diplomat was in common use among children in the special meaning they attached to this word), it’s even boring,” she said. “Why is she pestering me?”

And she turned to Vera.

"You will never understand this," she said, "because you have never loved anyone, you have no heart, you are only Madame de Genlis (this nickname, considered very offensive, was given to Vera by Nikolai), and your first pleasure is to make trouble for others. Flirt with Berg as much as you like.

She said this quickly and left the nursery.

Beautiful Vera, who had such an irritating, unpleasant effect on everyone, smiled again with the same smile, meaning nothing, and, apparently unaffected by what had been said to her, went to the mirror and straightened her scarf and hair. Looking at her beautiful face, she apparently became even colder and calmer.




XVIII


The conversation continued in the living room.

- Ah, my dear, - said the Countess, - my life is not all roses either. Don't I see that with such a way of life our fortune will not last long? And all this is the club and its kindness. We live in the village, do we rest? Theaters, hunts and God knows what. What can I say about me! Well, how did you arrange all this? I often wonder at you, Annette, how is it that at your age you ride in a carriage alone, to Moscow, to Petersburg, to all the ministers, to all the nobility, you know how to get along with everyone, I wonder! Well, how did you arrange it? I don't know how to do any of this.

- Oh, my dear! - answered Princess Anna Mikhailovna. - God forbid you find out how hard it is to remain a widow without support and with a son whom you love to the point of adoration. You will learn everything, - she continued with some pride. - My trial taught me. If I need to see one of these big shots, I write a note: "Princess such-and-such wishes to see such-and-such," - and I go myself in a cab at least two, three, four times, until I get what I need. I don't care what they think of me.

- Well, how did you ask about Borenka? - asked the Countess. - After all, yours is already a guard officer, and Nikolai is going to be a cadet. There is no one to bother about him. Who did you ask?

- Prince Vasily. He was very nice. He agreed to everything now, reported to the sovereign, - said Princess Anna Mikhailovna with delight, completely forgetting all the humiliation she had gone through to achieve her goal.

- What, has he grown old, Prince Vasily? - asked the Countess. - I haven't seen him since our theaters at the Rumyantsevs'. I think he forgot about me. He was chasing me, - the Countess recalled with a smile.

“Still the same,” answered Anna Mikhailovna. “The prince is kind, he’s generous. His high position hasn’t turned his head in the least. ‘I regret that I can do so little for you, dear princess,’ he says to me, ‘order me.’ No, he’s a fine man and a wonderful family member. But you know, Natalie, my love for my son. I don’t know what I wouldn’t do to make him happy. And my circumstances are so bad,” Anna Mikhailovna continued, sadly and lowering her voice, “so bad that I’m now in the most terrible position. My unfortunate trial is eating up everything I have and isn’t making any progress. I don’t have, can you imagine, literally not a ten-kopeck piece of money, and I don’t know what to outfit Boris with.” She took out her handkerchief and began to cry. “I need five hundred roubles, and I only have a twenty-five-rouble note. That’s the position I’m in.” My only hope now is for Prince Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov. If he does not want to support his godson - after all, he baptized Borya - and assign him something for his upkeep, then all my efforts will be in vain, I will have nothing to equip him with.

The Countess burst into tears and silently thought about something.

“I often think, maybe this is a sin,” said the princess, “but I often think: Prince Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov lives alone... he has a huge fortune... and what does he live for? Life is a burden to him, and Borya is just starting to live.”

“He will probably leave something for Boris,” said the Countess.

- God knows. These rich men and nobles are such egoists. But I will still go to him now, and with Boris, and tell him straight out what the matter is. Let them think what they want about me, I really don’t care when my son’s fate depends on it. - The princess stood up. - It’s two o’clock now. And at four o’clock you have dinner. I’ll have time to go.

And with the manners of a St. Petersburg business lady who knows how to make use of her time, Anna Mikhailovna sent for her son and went out into the hallway with him.

"Farewell, my dear," she said to the Countess, who accompanied her to the door. "Wish me success," she added in a whisper from her son.

- You are going to see Prince Kirill Vladimirovich, my dear, - said the Count from the dining room, also going out into the hall. - If he is better, invite Pierre to dine with me. After all, he has been to my place, danced with the children. Invite him by all means... Oh, let's see how Taras will distinguish himself today. They say that Count Orlov never had such a dinner as we are going to have.




XIX


"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhailovna to her son, when Countess Rostova's carriage, in which they were sitting, drove along the straw-lined street and entered the wide, red-sand-strewn courtyard of the famous, columned house of Count Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov. "My dear Boris," said the mother, pulling her hand out from under her old cape and placing it on her son's hand with a timid and affectionate movement, "please leave your pride behind. Count Kirill Vladimirovich is your godfather after all, and your future fate depends on him. Remember that, be as kind as you can be.

“If only I knew that anything other than humiliation would come of this,” the son answered coldly. “But I promised you and I am doing this for you. Only this is the last time, mother. Remember.”

Despite the fact that someone's carriage was standing at the entrance, the doorman, having looked at the mother and son, who, without ordering anyone to announce themselves, went straight into the glass vestibule between the two rows of statues in the niches, having looked significantly at the old cloak, asked whom they wanted, the princesses or the count, and having learned that it was the count, said that their Excellency was worse today and their Excellency was not receiving anyone.

“We can leave,” the son said in French, apparently pleased with this news.

“My friend!” said the mother in a pleading voice, again touching her son’s hand, as if this touch could calm or excite him.

Boris, fearing a scene in front of the doorman, fell silent with the air of a man who had decided to drink the cup to the dregs. Without taking off his overcoat, he looked questioningly at his mother.

- My dear fellow, - Anna Mikhailovna said in a gentle voice, turning to the doorman, - I know that Count Kirill Vladimirovich is very ill... That's why I came... I'm a relative... I won't bother you, my dear fellow... But I just need to see Prince Vasily Sergeyevich, because he's standing here. Please report.

The doorman sullenly pulled the cord upward and turned away.

“Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasily Sergeyevich,” he shouted to the waiter in stockings, shoes and a tailcoat who had run down from above and was peeking out from under the ledge of the stairs.

The mother straightened the folds of her dyed silk dress, looked at herself in the solid Venetian mirror on the wall, and briskly, in her worn-out shoes, walked up the carpeted stairs.

"Darling, you promised me," she turned to her son again, exciting him with a touch of her hand. The son, with his eyes downcast, walked not happily.

They entered the hall, from which one door led to the chambers assigned to Prince Vasily.

While the mother and son, having come out to the middle of the room, were about to ask the way of the old waiter who had jumped up at their entrance, a bronze handle turned on one of the doors, and Prince Vasily, in a velvet fur coat, with one star, in a homely manner, came out, seeing off a handsome, dark-haired man. This man was the famous St. Petersburg doctor Lorrain.

“So that’s true,” said the prince.

“Prince, it is human nature to err, but...” the doctor answered, lisping and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.

- Okay, okay….

Noticing Anna Mikhailovna with her son, Prince Vasily bowed to the doctor and silently, but with a questioning look, approached them. The son noticed with surprise how suddenly deep sorrow was expressed in the eyes of Princess Anna Mikhailovna.

- Yes, in what sad circumstances we had to meet, Prince... Well, how is our dear patient? - she said, not noticing the cold, insulting look directed at her and turning to the prince as to the best friend with whom she could share her grief. Prince Vasily looked at her questioningly, to the point of bewilderment, then at Boris. Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasily, without answering the bow, turned away to Anna Mikhailovna and answered her question with a movement of his head and lips, which meant the worst hope for the patient.

- Really? - Anna Mikhailovna exclaimed. - Oh, this is terrible! It's scary to think... This is my son, - she added, pointing at Boris. - He wanted to thank you himself.

Boris bowed politely again.

“Believe me, Prince, that a mother’s heart will never forget what you have done for us.

“I am glad that I could please you, my dear Anna Mikhailovna,” said Prince Vasily, straightening his jabot and in his gestures and voice showing here in Moscow, before his patron Anna Mikhailovna, even greater importance than in Petersburg, at Anna Scherer’s evening.

"Try to serve well and be worthy," he added, addressing Boris sternly. "I am glad... Are you here on leave?" he dictated in his dispassionate tone.

“I am awaiting orders, Your Excellency, to set out on my new assignment,” answered Boris, showing neither annoyance at the prince’s harsh tone nor a desire to enter into conversation, but so calmly and coldly that the prince looked at him intently.

- Do you live with your mother?

“I live with Countess Rostova,” said Boris, again adding coldly: “Your Excellency.”

He said “your excellency,” apparently not so much to flatter his interlocutor, but to restrain him from familiarity.

“This is the Ilya Rostov who married Natalie Z.,” said Anna Mikhailovna.

“I know, I know,” said Prince Vasily in his monotonous voice and with the contempt for everything Muscovite that was characteristic of a Petersburger.

"I could never understand how Natalie decided to marry that dirty bear. A completely stupid and ridiculous person. And a gambler, they say," he said, showing that, with all his contempt for Count Rostov and his ilk and with his important state affairs, he was not averse to town gossip.

“But he is a very kind man, Prince,” Anna Mikhailovna noted, smiling touchingly, as if she too knew that Count Rostov deserved such an opinion, but asked to take pity on the poor old man.

“What do the doctors say?” asked the princess, after a short silence and again expressing great sadness on her tear-stained face.

“There is little hope,” said the prince.

“And I so wanted to thank Uncle once again for all his good deeds to me and Borya. He is his godson,” she added in a tone as if this news should have made Prince Vasily extremely happy.

Prince Vasily thought for a moment and winced. Anna Mikhailovna realized that he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's will. She hastened to reassure him.

“If it were not for my true love and devotion to my uncle,” she said, pronouncing the word with special confidence and carelessness, “I know his character, noble, straightforward, but, after all, he only has the princesses with him... They are still young...” She bowed her head and added in a whisper: “Has he fulfilled his last duty, Prince? How precious are these last minutes! It cannot be worse, he must be prepared, if he is so bad. We women, Prince,” she smiled sweetly, “always know how to say these things. It is necessary to see him. No matter how hard it is for me, I have already become accustomed to suffering.”

The prince apparently understood, and understood, as he did at Anna Scherer’s party, that it was difficult to get rid of Anna Mikhailovna.

“This meeting wouldn’t be hard for him, dear Anna Mikhailovna,” he said. “Let’s wait until the evening, the doctors have promised a crisis.”

- But we cannot wait, Prince, at this moment. Think, it is a question of saving his soul. Ah! It is terrible, the duty of a Christian. - A door opened from the inner rooms, and one of the princesses, the count's nieces, came out, with a beautiful, sullen and cold face and a waist that was amazingly disproportionate to her legs.

Prince Vasily turned to her.

- What about him?

“It’s all the same. And what do you want, this noise…” said the princess, looking at Anna Mikhailovna as if she were a stranger.

“Oh, my dear, I didn’t recognize you,” Anna Mikhailovna said with a happy smile, walking lightly towards the count’s niece. “I came to help you look after your uncle. I can imagine how much you’ve suffered,” she added sympathetically, rolling her eyes.

The princess did not even smile, asked for an apology and immediately left. Anna Mikhailovna took off her gloves and settled down on the chair in the position she had won, inviting Prince Vasily to sit next to her.

- Boris! - she said to her son and smiled. - I'll go to the Count... to my uncle, and you go to Pierre for now, my friend, and don't forget to give him the invitation from the Rostovs. They're inviting him to dinner. I don't think he'll go? - she turned to the prince.

“On the contrary,” said the prince, apparently out of sorts. “I would be glad if you could rid me of this young man. He’s sitting here. The Count has never asked about him.”

He shrugged. The waiter led the young man down and up another staircase to Pyotr Vladimirovich.




XX


Boris, thanks to the calm and restraint of his character, always knew how to cope in difficult circumstances. Now this calm and restraint were strengthened by the cloud of happiness that surrounded him that morning, in which various faces appeared to him, and through which his involuntary observations of his mother's methods and character more easily affected him. The position of a petitioner in which his mother placed him was difficult for him, but he felt that he was not to blame for it.

Pierre never managed to choose a career for himself in Petersburg and was actually sent to Moscow for his riotous behavior. The story that was told at Count Rostov's was true. Pierre had taken part by his presence in the tying up of the policeman with the bear. He had arrived a few days before and was staying, as usual, at his father's house. Although he had supposed that his story was already known in Moscow and that the ladies around his father, who were always unkind to him, would take advantage of this opportunity to irritate the Count, he nevertheless went to his father's half on the day of his arrival. Entering the drawing room, the usual place for the princesses to stay, he greeted the ladies who were sitting at their embroidery frame, with a book that one of them was reading aloud. There were three of them. The eldest, a neat, long-waisted, strict young lady, the same one who had come out to Anna Mikhailovna, was reading; The younger ones, both rosy and pretty, differing from each other only in that one had a mole above her lip, which made her very pretty, were sewing in an embroidery frame. Pierre was greeted as if he were dead or had the plague. The elder princess interrupted her reading and silently looked at him with frightened eyes; the younger, without a mole, of a cheerful and laughing nature, bent down to the embroidery frame to hide a smile, probably caused by the coming scene, the amusing nature of which she foresaw. She pulled down a strand of wool and bent down, as if sorting out the patterns and barely restraining herself from laughing.

“Hello, cousin,” said Pierre. “Don’t you recognize me?”

- I know you too well, too well.

"How is the Count? May I see him?" Pierre asked awkwardly, as always, but not embarrassed.

“The Count suffers both physically and mentally, and it seems that you have taken care to cause him as much mental suffering as possible.

“May I see the Count?” Pierre repeated.

- Hm!.. If you want to kill him, kill him completely, then you can see. Olga, go and see if the broth is ready for Uncle, it's almost time, - she added, showing Pierre that they were busy, and busy calming his father, while he, obviously, was only busy upsetting him.

Olga went out. Pierre stood there, looked at his sisters and, bowing, said:

- Then I'll go to my place. When it's possible, you'll tell me. - He went out, and the ringing, but not loud, laughter of his sister with the birthmark was heard behind him.

The next day Prince Vasily arrived and settled in the count's house. He called Pierre to him and said to him:

- My dear, if you behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; I have nothing more to say to you. The Count is very, very ill, you must not see him at all.

From then on Pierre was not disturbed, and he spent the whole day alone upstairs in his room.

While Boris entered his room, Pierre, who was at ease everywhere with his thoughts, was walking around his room, occasionally stopping in corners, making threatening gestures toward the wall, as if piercing an invisible enemy with a sword, and looking sternly over his glasses, and then again beginning his walk, muttering vague words, shrugging his shoulders and spreading his arms.

"England is finished!" he said, frowning and pointing his finger at someone. "Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to popular law, is sentenced to..." He did not have time to finish his sentence on Pitt, imagining himself at that moment to be Napoleon himself and, together with his beloved hero, having already made the dangerous crossing of the Pas-de-Calais and conquered London, when he saw a young, slender and handsome officer coming in to him. He stopped. Pierre, who rarely saw Boris, had left him a boy of fourteen and decidedly did not remember him; but, in spite of this, with his characteristic quick and cordial manner, he took him by the hand and smiled amiably, showing his spoiled teeth.

- Do you remember me? - said Boris. - I came with my mother to see the Count, but he seems to be not quite well.

“Yes, he seems to be unwell. Everyone is worrying him,” answered Pierre, not noticing at all that he seemed to be reproaching Boris and his mother.

He tried to remember who this young man was; Boris saw a hint in Pierre’s words.

He flushed and looked at Pierre boldly and mockingly, as if to say: "I have nothing to be ashamed of." Pierre did not know what to say.

“Count Rostov asked you to come and have dinner with him today,” Boris continued after a rather long and awkward silence for Pierre.

- Ah! Count Rostov! - Pierre spoke joyfully. - So you are his son, Ilya. Can you imagine, I didn't recognize you at first. Remember how we went to Vorobyovy Gory with Madame Jacquot?

“You are mistaken,” Boris said slowly, with a bold and somewhat mocking smile. “I am Boris, the son of Princess Anna Mikhailovna Drubetskaya. Rostov’s father is called Ilya, and his son Nikolai. And I did not know any Madame Jacot.”

Pierre waved his arms and head as if a mosquito or bees had attacked him.

- Oh, what is this! I got it all mixed up. There are so many relatives in Moscow! You are Boris... yes. That's what we agreed on. Well, what do you think about the Boulogne expedition? After all, the English will be in trouble if Napoleon crosses the channel. I think the expedition is quite possible. Only Villeneuve would not make a mistake.

Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition, he did not read the newspapers and was hearing about Villeneuve for the first time.

"Here in Moscow we are more occupied with dinners and gossip than with politics," he said in his calm, mocking tone. "I know nothing about it and I don't think anything about it. Moscow is occupied with gossip more than anything else," he continued. "Now they are talking about you and the Count."

Pierre smiled his kind smile, as if afraid for his interlocutor, lest he should say something of which he would begin to repent. But Boris spoke distinctly, clearly and dryly, looking straight into Pierre's eyes.

“Moscow has nothing better to do than gossip,” he continued. “Everyone is busy with who the Count will leave his fortune to, although perhaps he will outlive us all, which I sincerely wish.”

“Yes, it’s very difficult,” Pierre continued, “very difficult.”

Pierre was always afraid that this boy, an officer, would inadvertently engage in an awkward conversation for himself.

“And it must seem to you,” said Boris, blushing, but not changing his voice or posture, “as it must seem that everyone is only busy getting something from the rich man.

“That’s right,” thought Pierre.

- And I want to tell you, in order to avoid misunderstandings, that you will be very much mistaken if you include me and my mother among these people. We are very poor, but I, at least, speak for myself, precisely because your father is rich, I do not consider myself his relative and will never ask or accept anything from him, - he finished, becoming more and more inflamed.

Pierre could not understand for a long time, but when he did, he jumped up from the sofa, grabbed Boris by the hand from below with his characteristic speed and awkwardness and, blushing much more than Boris, began to speak with a mixed feeling of shame and annoyance.

- Listen... This is strange! Did I... and who could have thought... I know very well...

But Boris interrupted him again.

"I'm glad I've said everything. Maybe you don't like it, forgive me," he said, calming Pierre instead of being calmed by him, "but I hope I haven't offended you. I have a rule of saying everything straight out. How can I convey it? Are you coming to dine with the Rostovs?"

And Boris, apparently having thrown off a heavy responsibility, having himself gotten out of an awkward situation and put someone else in it, became cheerful and free.

“No, listen,” said Pierre, calming down. “You are a wonderful man. What you just said is very good, very good. Of course, you don’t know me, we haven’t seen each other for so long… when we were children… You can assume in me… I understand you, I understand you very well. I wouldn’t do that, I wouldn’t have the courage, but that’s wonderful. I’m very glad I met you. It’s strange,” he added, after a pause and smiling, “what you assumed about me!” He laughed. “Oh well! We’ll get to know each other better. Please.” He shook Boris’s hand.

- You know, I have never been to the Count. He never invited me. I feel sorry for him as a person... But what can I do? - Boris smiled cheerfully and good-naturedly. - And do you think that Napoleon will have time to transport the army? - he asked.

Pierre understood that Boris wanted to change the conversation and, agreeing with him, began to outline the advantages and disadvantages of the Boulogne enterprise.

The footman came to call Boris to the princess. The princess was leaving. Pierre promised to come to dinner, then, in order to get closer to Boris, he firmly shook his hand, looking affectionately into his eyes through his glasses... After he left, Pierre walked around the room for a long time, no longer piercing the invisible enemy with his sword, but smiling at the memory of this sweet, intelligent and firm young man.

As it happens in early youth and especially in a lonely situation, he felt an unreasonable tenderness for this young man and promised himself to certainly become friends with him.

Prince Vasily saw the princess off. The princess was holding a handkerchief, and her face was in tears.

“It’s terrible! It’s terrible!” she said. “But whatever it costs me, I’ll do my duty. I’ll come and spend the night. He can’t be left like this. Every minute is precious. I don’t understand why the princesses are hesitating. Maybe God will help me find a way to prepare him!.. Farewell, Prince, may God support you…”

“Farewell, my dear,” answered Prince Vasily, turning away from her.

"Oh, he's in a terrible state," said the mother to her son as they got back into the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anyone. Perhaps it will be better."

“I don’t understand, mother, what his relationship is with Pierre,” asked the son.

– The will will say everything, my friend, our fate depends on it...

- But why do you think he will leave us anything?

- Ah, my friend! He is so rich, and we are so poor!

- Well, that's not a good enough reason, Mommy.

- Oh, my God! My God! How pitiful he is! - exclaimed the mother.




XXI


When Anna Mikhailovna left with her son to see Prince Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov, the Countess sat alone for a long time, putting a handkerchief to her eyes. Finally, she rang the bell.

"What are you saying, my dear," she said angrily to the girl who had kept her waiting for several minutes. "Don't you want to serve? Well, I'll find you a place."

The Countess was upset by the grief and humiliating poverty of her friend and was therefore out of sorts, which she always expressed by calling the servant “dear” and “you”.

“I’m sorry,” said the maid.

- Ask the Count to come to me.

The Count waddled over to his wife, looking somewhat guilty, as always.

- Well, Countess! What a sauté with Madeira made from hazel grouse will be.

I tried it; it was not for nothing that I paid a thousand rubles for Taraska. It was worth it!

He sat down next to his wife, resting his hands on his knees in a dashing manner... and ruffling his grey hair.

- What do you order, Countess?

- Look here, my friend, what is this that you have stained here? - she said, pointing to the waistcoat. - This is saute, right, - she added, smiling. - Look here, Count, I need money.

Her face became sad.

- Ah, Countess!.. - And the Count began to fuss, taking out his wallet.

“I need a lot, Count, I need five hundred rubles.” And she took out a cambric handkerchief and rubbed her husband’s waistcoat with it.

- Right now, right now. Hey, who's there? - he shouted in the voice that only people shout when they are sure that those they call will rush headlong to their call. - Send Mitenka to me!

Mitenka, the nobleman's son, raised by the count, who was now in charge of all his affairs, entered the room with quiet steps.

- Look here, my dear, - said the count to the respectful young man who had entered. - Bring me... - He thought for a moment. - Yes, 700 rubles, yes. But be careful, don't bring them torn and dirty, like that time, but good ones, for the countess.

“Yes, Mitenka, please, so that they are clean,” said the countess, sighing sadly.

- Your Excellency, when would you like it delivered? - said Mitenka. - Please know that... However, please do not worry, - he added, noticing how the Count had already begun to breathe heavily and frequently, which was always a sign of incipient anger. - I almost forgot... Would you like it delivered this very minute?

- Yes, yes, that's it, bring it. Give it to the Countess.

“What a treasure this Mitenka is,” added the Count, smiling, when the young man left. “Nothing is impossible. I can’t stand it. Everything is possible.”

- Ah, money, Count, money, how much grief it causes in the world! - said the Countess. - And I really need this money.

“You, Countess, are a well-known spendthrift,” said the Count, and, kissing his wife’s hand, he went back into the office.

When Anna Mikhailovna returned again from Bezukhov, the Countess already had money, all in new bills, lying under a handkerchief on the table, and Anna Mikhailovna noticed that the Countess was worried about something and had a sad look.

“Well, my friend?” asked the Countess.

- Oh, what a terrible state he is in! You can't recognize him, he is so bad, so bad; I stayed for a minute and didn't say two words...

“Anette, for God’s sake, don’t refuse me,” the countess suddenly said, blushing, which was so strange given her elderly, thin, and important face, taking money out from under her kerchief.

Anna Mikhailovna immediately understood what was going on and bent down to deftly embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.

– Here’s something from me for Boris to sew a uniform…

Anna Mikhailovna was already embracing her and crying. The Countess was crying too. They were crying because they were friends, and because they were kind, and because they, friends of their youth, were preoccupied with such a base subject, money, and because their youth was gone… But the tears of both were pleasant…




XXII


Countess Rostova with her daughter and already a large number of guests were sitting in the drawing room. The Count led the male guests into the study, offering them his hunting collection of Turkish pipes. Occasionally he would come out and ask if she had arrived. They were expecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, nicknamed in society the terrible dragoon, a lady famous not for her wealth or honors, but for the directness of her mind and frank simplicity of her manners. Marya Dmitrievna was known by the royal family, all of Moscow and all of Petersburg knew her, and both cities, amazed by her, quietly laughed at her rudeness, told jokes about her; nevertheless, everyone without exception respected and feared her.

In the smoke-filled office, the conversation was about the war that had been declared by the manifesto, and about the recruitment. No one had yet read the manifesto, but everyone knew of its appearance. The Count was sitting on an ottoman, between two neighbors who were smoking and talking. The Count himself was neither smoking nor talking, but, tilting his head first to one side, then to the other, he looked with obvious pleasure at the smokers and listened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he had set against each other.

One of the speakers was a civilian, with a wrinkled, bilious, and thin, clean-shaven face, a man already approaching old age, although dressed like the most fashionable young man; he was sitting with his feet on the ottoman, with the air of a homebody, and, with an amber stick far into his mouth from the side, he was inhaling the smoke abruptly and squinting. He was a well-known Moscow wit, the old bachelor Shinshin, the Countess's cousin, a dandy who had gone too far, as they used to say in Moscow drawing rooms. He seemed to condescend to his interlocutor. The other, a fresh, pink guards officer, immaculately washed, buttoned up, and combed, held the amber stick in the middle of his mouth and with his pink lips lightly drew out the smoke, blowing it out in rings from his handsome mouth, which seemed to be intended chiefly for blowing out rings. This was Lieutenant Berg, an officer of the Semenovsky Regiment, with whom Boris had ridden to the regiment and with whom Natasha had teased Vera, the eldest Countess, calling Berg her fiancé. Berg had moved from the conversation about the war to his own affairs, developing his future service plans and, apparently, was very proud to be talking with such a famous man as Shinshin. The Count sat between them and listened attentively. The most pleasant occupation for the Count, with the exception of the game of Boston, which he loved very much, was the position of a listener, especially when he managed to pit two lively and talkative interlocutors against each other. Although Berg was not a talkative interlocutor, the Count noticed a mocking smile on Shinshin’s lips, as if saying: “See how I will work on this officer.” And the Count, without any ill feelings towards Berg, consoled himself by finding wit in every word of Shinshin.

“Well, of course, my dear father, the most respected Alphonse Karlovich,” Shinshin said, laughing and combining, which was the peculiarity of his speech, the most trivial Russian expressions with refined French phrases. “Do you expect to receive income from the treasury, do you want to receive income from the company?”

- No, sir, Pyotr Nikolaevich, I just want to prove that the cavalry has much less advantage against the infantry. Now, Pyotr Nikolaevich, understand my position.

Berg always spoke very precisely, calmly and politely. His conversation always concerned only himself, he always remained quietly silent while they were talking about something that had no direct relation to him. And he could remain silent in this way for several hours, without experiencing or causing the slightest confusion in others. But as soon as the conversation concerned him personally, he began to speak at length and with visible pleasure.

“Consider my position, Pyotr Nikolaevich, if I were in the cavalry, I would receive no more than two hundred rubles a third, even with the rank of lieutenant, but now I receive two hundred and thirty,” he said with a joyful, pleasant, egotistical smile, looking at Shinshin and the count, as if it was obvious to him that his success would always constitute the main goal of the desires of all other people.

The Count looked back at Shinshin, waiting to see if the wit would begin soon, but Shinshin was silent, only chuckling. The Count chuckled too.

- Besides, Pyotr Nikolaevich, having transferred to the guards, I am in sight, - Berg continued, - and vacancies in the guards infantry are much more frequent. Then you will figure out for yourself how I could get a job with two hundred and thirty rubles.

He paused and then continued triumphantly:

- And I put it aside and send it to my father. - And he let the ring go.

- The balance is established. The German threshes his bread with the butt of his axe, as the proverb says, - said Shinshin, shifting the amber to the other side of his mouth and winked at the Count.

The Count burst out laughing. The other guests, seeing that Shinshin was leading the conversation, came up to listen. Berg, not noticing either the mockery or the indifference, told a long, detailed and distinct story about how by transferring to the Guards he had already won a rank over his comrades in the corps, how in wartime a company commander can be killed, and he, remaining the senior in the company, can very easily be a company commander, and how everyone in the regiment loves him, and how his papa is pleased with him. The listeners all waited with the Count to see if something funny would soon come, but nothing funny came. Berg, apparently, enjoyed telling all this, and seemed not to suspect that other people might also have their own interests. But everything he told was so sweet, sedate, the naivety of his youthful egotism was so obvious that he disarmed his listeners, and even Shinshin stopped laughing at him. He seemed to him not worth talking about.

- Well, father, you will be useful in both the infantry and the cavalry, I predict that for you. I promise you a brilliant career, - he said, patting him on the shoulder and lowering his feet from the ottoman. Berg smiled happily. The Count, and after him the guests, went out into the living room.




XXIII


There was that time before a formal dinner when the assembled guests of honour do not begin a long conversation while waiting for the call to the hors d'oeuvres, but at the same time consider it necessary to stir and not remain silent, in order to show that they are not at all impatient to sit down at the table. The hosts glance at the door and occasionally exchange glances with each other. The guests try to guess from these glances who or what else they are waiting for: an important relative who has arrived late, or a dish which, according to information coming from the kitchen, is not yet ready. In the servants' room at this time the footmen have not yet managed to start a conversation about the gentlemen, because they are constantly forced to rise for the arrivals.

In the kitchen, the cooks at this time become embittered and with gloomy faces, in white caps and aprons, move from the stove to the spit and the cupboard and shout at the cooks, who at this moment become especially timid. The coachmen at the entrance set up the carriages and, sitting calmly on the box, talk to each other or run into the coachman's room to smoke their pipes.

Pierre arrived and sat awkwardly in the middle of the drawing room, on the first armchair he came across, blocking everyone's way. The Countess wanted to make him talk, but he naively looked around him through his glasses, as if searching for someone, and answered all the Countess's questions in monosyllables. He was shy, and he was the only one who didn't notice it. Most of the guests, who knew his story with the bear, looked curiously at this big, fat and meek man, wondering how such a lout and modest man could do such a thing to the policeman.

“Have you arrived recently?” the Countess asked him.

“Yes, madam,” he answered, looking around.

- Have you seen my husband?

“No, madam,” he smiled, completely inappropriately.

- You were in Paris recently, I think? I think it was very interesting.

“Very interesting,” he answered, wondering to himself where this Boris he liked so much could still be.

The Countess exchanged glances with Princess Anna Mikhailovna. Anna Mikhailovna understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and, sitting down next to him, began to talk about her father; but, just like the Countess, he answered her only in monosyllabic words. The guests were all busy among themselves. The rustling of dresses could be heard from all sides. The Razumovskys... It was delightful... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina... Apraksina...

The Countess stood up to go out into the hall.

- Marya Dmitrievna? - her voice was heard from the hall.

“That’s her,” answered a rough female voice, and then Marya Dmitrievna, who had arrived with her daughter, entered the room.

All the young ladies and even the ladies, except the oldest, stood up. Marya Dmitrievna stopped in the doorway and from the height of her corpulent body, holding high her beautiful fifty-year-old head with gray curls, looked at the guests. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke Russian.

“To the dear birthday girl and her children,” she said in her loud, deep voice, drowning out all other sounds. “I would have come myself in the morning to visit, but I don’t like hanging around in the morning. What are you, an old sinner,” she turned to the count, who was kissing her hand, “are you bored in Moscow, I suppose? Is there nowhere to run the dogs? But what can we do, my dear, when these little birds grow up…” She pointed to her daughter, who was not at all like her mother, a pretty young lady who seemed as tender and sweet in appearance as her mother seemed rude. “Whether you like it or not, they need to find suitors. There they are, yours, and they are all of age,” she pointed to Natasha and Sonya, who had entered the drawing room.

When Marya Dmitrievna arrived, everyone gathered in the living room, waiting to go to the table. Boris entered, and Pierre immediately joined him.

- Well, my Cossack? (Marya Dmitrievna called Natasha a Cossack.) What a trump card the girl has become! - she said, caressing Natasha with her hand, who approached her hand without fear and cheerfully. - I know that the girl is a rake, she should be flogged, but I love her.

She took out from her huge reticule (Marya Dmitrievna’s reticule was known to everyone for its abundance and variety of contents) some hyacinth earrings in pear shape and, having given them to Natasha, who was beaming and flushed for her birthday, she immediately turned away from her and, noticing Pierre, addressed him:

“Hey, hey! my dear fellow! Come here,” she said in a pretendedly quiet and thin voice, as one says to a dog that one wants to tease. “Come here, my dear fellow…”

Pierre approached, frightened, but with a schoolboyish naivety and cheerfully looking at her through his glasses, as if he himself was going to have as much fun as anyone else in the upcoming fun.

- Come here, come here, my dear! I told your father the truth when he was in a situation, but God commands you.

She was silent. Everyone was silent, waiting for what was to come, and feeling that this was only a preface.

- He's a fine fellow, nothing to say! He's a fine boy! His father is lying on his bed, and he's having fun, putting the policeman on a bear. It's a shame, father, it's a shame! It would have been better if he'd gone to war.

She turned away and offered her hand to the Count, who could hardly keep from laughing. Pierre only winked at Boris.

“Well then, it’s time to go to the table, I guess,” said Marya Dmitrievna.

The Count walked ahead with Marya Dmitrievna, then the Countess, led by a hussar colonel, a necessary person with whom Nikolai was to catch up with the regiment; Anna Mikhailovna with Shinshin. Berg offered his hand to Vera. Julie, always smiling and rolling her eyes, Marya Dmitrievna's daughter, who had not let Nikolai go from her side since her arrival, walked with him to the table. Behind them came other couples, stretching across the entire hall, and behind them all, one by one, the children, the tutors and governesses. The waiters began to stir, the chairs rattled, music began to play in the gallery, and the guests took their seats. The sounds of the Count's home music were replaced by the sounds of knives and forks, the conversation of the guests, the quiet steps of the gray, respectable waiters.

At one end of the table sat the Countess. On her right was Marya Dmitrievna, on her left Princess Anna Mikhailovna and other guests. At the other end sat the Count, on her left the Hussar Colonel, on her right Shinshin and other male guests. On one side of the long table were the older youth: Vera next to Berg, Pierre next to Boris; on the other side were the children, the tutors and governesses. The Count, from behind the crystal, the bottles and the fruit vases, kept glancing at his wife, although, in fact, all he could see was her high cap with blue ribbons, and he diligently poured wine for his neighbors, not forgetting himself. The Countess, too, from behind the pineapples, not forgetting her duties as hostess, cast significant glances at her husband, whose bald head and face, it seemed to her, stood out more sharply with their redness than his gray hair. At the ladies' end there was a regular babbling; The voices in the men's room grew louder and louder, especially those of the hussar colonel, who ate and drank so much, blushing more and more, that the count was already setting him up as an example to the other guests. Berg was quietly telling Vera, who was smiling unpleasantly, about the financial advantages of wartime; Boris was naming the guests at the table to his new friend Pierre and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sitting opposite him.

Pierre, who had unwittingly adopted the Petersburg contempt for Muscovites, verified everything he had heard about the customs of Moscow society with his own observations. Everything was like this: stiffness (dishes were served according to rank and age), limited interests (no one was involved in politics) and hospitality, to which he, however, gave due justice. Beginning with two soups, from which he chose turtle soup, and a kulebyaka, and up to the sauté of hazel grouse, which the Count liked so much, he did not miss a single dish, not a single wine, which the butler mysteriously stuck out from behind his neighbor's shoulder in a bottle wrapped in a napkin and quietly muttered: "Drey Madeira, Hungarian, Rhine wine," etc. He substituted the first of the four crystal glasses with the Count's monogram that stood in front of each place setting, and drank with pleasure, looking at the guests with an increasingly pleasant look. Natasha, who was sitting opposite him, looked at Boris as thirteen-year-old girls look at a boy with whom they have kissed for the first time in the morning and with whom they are in love, and smiled occasionally. Pierre glanced at her incessantly and fell under the glance and smile intended for Boris.

“It’s strange,” he whispered to Boris, “she’s not pretty, smaller than Rostova, this little one, dark-haired, but what a sweet face! Isn’t that true?”

“The older one is better,” answered Boris, smiling slightly.

- No, can you imagine? All her features are wrong, but she's wonderfully sweet.

And Pierre kept looking at her. Boris expressed surprise at Pierre's strange taste. Nikolai sat far from Sonya, next to Julie Akhrosimova, responding to her affectionate, enthusiastic speeches, and meanwhile with his gaze he constantly reassured his cousin, letting her feel that wherever he was, at the other end of the table or at the other end of the world, his thoughts would always belong to her alone. Sonya smiled formally, but, apparently, she was already tormented by jealousy, now turning pale, now blushing and listening with all her might to what Nikolai and Julie were saying to each other. Natasha sat, to her chagrin, with the children, between her little brother and the fat governess. The governess looked around restlessly and constantly whispered something to her charge and immediately glanced at the guests, expecting approval. The German governor tried to remember all the types of dishes, desserts and wines in order to describe everything in detail in a letter to his family in Germany, and was very offended by the fact that the butler carried around a bottle wrapped in a napkin. The German frowned, tried to pretend that he did not want to receive this wine, but he was offended because no one wanted to understand that he needed the wine not to quench his thirst, not out of greed, but out of conscientious curiosity...




XXIV


Natasha, apparently, could not sit still, she pinched her brother, winked at the governess, which made fat Petrusha burst out laughing, and suddenly leaned her whole body across the table to Boris and, to the horror of the governess, spilled kvass from a glass onto the spotless tablecloth, and, not paying attention to the comments, demanded attention to herself. Boris bent down, Pierre also listened, waiting for what this small, dark-haired girl would say, who, despite her irregular features, as it seemed to him, by a strange fantasy peculiar to him alone, liked him more than anyone else he had seen at this table.

“Boris, will there be some cake?” Natasha asked, raising her eyebrows significantly.

- I don’t know, really.

“No, very nice!” Pierre whispered, smiling, as if someone had been arguing with him about this.

Natasha immediately noticed the impression she made on Pierre, and smiled at him cheerfully, and even nodded her head slightly and shook her curls, looking at him. He could take it as he wished. Pierre had not yet said a word to Natasha, but with this one mutual smile they already told themselves that they liked each other.

At the men's end of the table, meanwhile, the conversation became more and more animated. The colonel said that the manifesto declaring war had already been issued in Petersburg and that the copy he had seen himself had now been delivered by courier to the commander-in-chief.

- And why the hell are we going to fight Bonaparte, - said Shinshin. - He has already knocked Austria's arrogance down. I'm afraid it might be our turn now.

The colonel was a stocky, tall and sanguine German, obviously a serviceman and a patriot. He was offended by Shinshin's words.

- And then, my dear sir, - he said, although speaking Russian correctly, but pronouncing e instead of e and ъ instead of ь, - then, the Emperor knows this. He said in the manifesto that he cannot look with indifference on the dangers threatening Russia, and that the security of the Empire, its dignity and the sanctity of alliances... - he said, for some reason especially emphasizing the word "alliances", as if this was the whole essence of the matter. And with his characteristic infallible official memory, he repeated the opening words of the manifesto: - "... and the desire, the sole and indispensable goal of the Emperor: to establish peace in Europe on a solid foundation - his decision to move part of the army abroad now and to make new efforts to achieve this intention." “That’s why, soapy sovereign,” he concluded, instructively drinking a glass of Lafite and looking back at the count for encouragement.

- You know the proverb: "Yerema, Yerema, you should stay at home and sharpen your spindles," said Shinshin, lounging and grimacing. - By the way, this suits us surprisingly well. Suvorov, even he was smashed to pieces, but where are our Suvorovs now? I ask you, - the wit said, constantly jumping from Russian to French and breaking up.

"We must fight to the last drop of blood," said the colonel, striking the table with a gesture not entirely in good taste, "and die for our Emperor, and then all will be well. And to reason as pos-sible," he especially drew out his voice on the word "possible," "as pos-sible as pos-sible," he finished, again turning to the count. "That is how we, old hussars, judge, that is all. And how do you judge, a young man and a young hussar," he added, turning to Nikolai, who, hearing that the matter was about war, left his interlocutor and looked with all his eyes and listened with all his ears to the colonel.

“I completely agree with you,” answered Nikolai, flushing all over, twirling his plate and rearranging the glasses with such a determined and desperate look, as if at the present moment he were exposed to great danger, “I am convinced that the Russians must die or win,” he said, feeling himself, just as the others did, after the word had already been said, that it had been too enthusiastic and pompous for the present occasion and therefore awkward, but the handsome and impressionable youth of his open face made his outburst seem sweet rather than funny to others.

"It is wonderful, wonderful, what you said," said Julie, sighing and hiding her eyes under her eyelids from the depth of her feeling. Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears, behind her ears, and to her neck and shoulders, while Nikolai was speaking. Pierre listened to the colonel's speeches and nodded his head approvingly, although he considered, according to his own reasoning, patriotism to be stupidity. He involuntarily sympathized with every sincere word.

"That's wonderful. Very good, very good," he said.

“A real hussar, young man,” shouted the colonel, hitting the table again.

- What are you making noise about? - Marya Dmitrievna's bass voice was suddenly heard across the table. - Why are you banging on the table? - she turned to the hussar, always saying what others only thought. - Who are you angry at? You probably think that there are Frenchmen in front of you?

“I’m telling the truth,” said the hussar, smiling.

“Everything about the war,” the count shouted across the table. “After all, my son is coming, Marya Dmitrievna, my son is coming.”

“And I have four sons in the army, and I don’t worry. Everything is God’s will, and you will die lying on the stove, and God will have mercy on you in battle,” Marya Dmitrievna’s deep voice sounded without any effort from the other end of the table.

- That's true.

And the conversation again focused - the ladies at her end of the table, the men at his.

“But you won’t ask,” said Natasha’s little brother, “but you won’t ask!”

“I’ll ask,” Natasha answered.

Her face suddenly lit up, expressing a desperate and cheerful determination, the determination that an ensign has when he rushes into battle. She stood up and with shining eyes and a restrained smile turned to her mother:

- Mom - What do you want? - the Countess asked in fear, but seeing from her daughter's face that this was a prank, she waved her hand sternly, making a threatening and negative gesture with her head.

The conversation died down.

- Mom The Countess wanted to frown, but an involuntary smile of love for her beloved child had already come to life on her lips. Marya Dmitrievna shook her thick finger.

“Cossack!” she said threateningly.

Most of the guests looked at their elders, not knowing how to take this prank.

- Here I am for you! - said the Countess.

- Mom Sonya and fat Petya hid from laughter.

“That’s why I asked,” Natasha whispered to her little brother, without taking her eyes off her mother and without changing her naive expression.

- Ice cream! They just won’t give it to you, - said Marya Dmitrievna.

Natasha saw that there was nothing to be afraid of, and therefore she was not afraid of Marya Dmitrievna.

- Marya Dmitrievna, what ice cream? I don’t like creamy ice cream.

- Carrot.

- No, which one? Marya Dmitrievna, which one? - she almost shouted. - I want to know.

Marya Dmitrievna and the Countess laughed, and all the guests followed them. Everyone laughed not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer, but at the incomprehensible courage and dexterity of this girl, who knew how and dared to treat Marya Dmitrievna in such a way.

“Your sister is lovely,” said Julie.

Natasha only stopped when she was told that there would be pineapple. Before the ice cream, champagne was served. The music started playing again, the Count kissed the Countess, and the guests, standing up, congratulated the Countess, clinked glasses with the Count, the children, and each other across the table. Julie clinked glasses with Nikolai, letting him know with her looks that this clinking had some other important meaning. Again the waiters started running around, chairs rattled, and in the same order, but with redder faces, the guests returned to the drawing room and the Count's office.




XXV


They moved the Boston tables apart, dispersed into parties, and the Count's guests settled into two living rooms, a sofa room, and a library. Marya Dmitrievna scolded Shinshin, with whom she was playing.

- You know how to scold everyone, but you couldn’t guess that you had to go from the Queen of Hearts to the Queen of Hearts.

The Count, having fanned out his cards, could hardly resist his habit of taking an afternoon nap and laughed at everything. The young people, incited by the Countess, gathered around the clavichord and harp. Julie was the first, at the request of everyone, to play a piece with variations on the harp and, together with the other girls, began to ask Natasha and Nikolai, known for their musicality, to sing something. Natasha, who was approached first, did not agree and did not refuse.

"Wait, I'll try," she said, moving to the other side of the clavichord and testing her voice, she took a few clear chest notes in a low voice, which had an unexpected effect on everyone. Everyone fell silent until the sounds died away at the top of the high, spacious room.

“Yes, yes,” she said, cheerfully shaking her curls, which fell over her eyes.

Pierre, very flushed after dinner, came up to her. He wanted to see her closer and see how she would talk to him.

“Why not?” he asked as simply as if they had known each other for a hundred years.

“Sometimes there are days when the voice is not good,” she said and went over to the harpsichord.

- And today?

“Excellent,” she said, addressing him with as much enthusiasm as if she were praising someone else’s voice.

Pierre, pleased to have seen her speak, went up to Boris, whom he liked almost as much that day as Natasha.

"What a sweet little black child," he said. "Even though she's not pretty."

Pierre, after the boredom of solitude in his father's large house, was in that happy state of a young man when you love everyone and see only good in all people. Even at dinner he had involuntarily despised the Moscow public from his Petersburg heights. But now it seemed that only here, in Moscow, did people know how to live, and he was already thinking how good it would be if he could visit this house every day, listen to this little dark girl sing and speak, and look at her.

“Nikolai,” said Natasha, approaching the clavichord, “what are we going to sing?”

“At least ‘The Key,’” Nikolai answered. He was obviously becoming unbearable from Julie pestering him, who thought that he should be too happy with her attention.

- Well, come on, come on. Boris, come here, - Natasha shouted. - And where is Sonya? - She looked around and, seeing that her friend was not in the room, ran after her.

"The Key," as the Rostovs called it, was an old quartet taught to them by their music teacher Dimler. This "Key" was usually sung by Natasha, Sonya, Nikolai, and Boris, who, although he had no talent or voice of his own, had a good ear and, with his characteristic precision and calmness in everything, could learn the part and hold it firmly. While Natasha was gone, they began to ask Nikolai to sing something alone. He refused, almost impolitely and gloomily. Julie Akhrosimova, smiling, approached him.

“Why are you putting on such a gloomy face?” she asked. “Although I understand that music, and especially singing, requires a disposition. It’s the same with me. There are moments…”

Nikolai winced and went to the clavichords. Before sitting down, he noticed that Sonya was not in the room and wanted to leave.

“Nikolai, don’t force yourself to ask, it’s ridiculous,” said the Countess.

“I’m not forcing myself to be asked, maman,” Nikolai answered and with an impulsive movement slammed the lid, opening the clavichord, and sat down.

He thought for a minute and began Kavelin's song:

		To which, parting with the dear one,
		Why should I say "forgive me" to her?
		As if parting with life,
		Can't be happy anymore?
		Wouldn't it be better to just say "goodbye"?
		"Until new joys" to say,
		And in these dreams of enchantment
		Forget yourself and time?

His voice was neither good nor bad, and he sang lazily, as if performing a boring duty, but despite this, everything in the room fell silent, the young ladies shook their heads and sighed, and Pierre, covering his teeth with a tender and weak smile, which was especially funny on his fat, full-blooded face, remained like that until the end of the song.

Julie closed her eyes and sighed loudly enough for the whole room to hear.

Nikolai sang with that sense of proportion which he had so lacked in life and which in art is not acquired by any study. He sang with that ease and freedom which showed that he did not work, but sang as he spoke. Only when he began to sing, he expressed himself not as a child, as he seemed in life, but as a man in whom passions were already stirring.




XXVI


Meanwhile, Natasha, running into Sonya's room, did not find her friend there, ran into the nursery - and she was not there. Natasha realized that Sonya was in the corridor on the trunk. The trunk in the corridor was the place of sorrows of the female younger generation of the Rostov house. Indeed, Sonya in her airy pink dress, crushing it, lay face down on the nanny's dirty, striped feather bed on the trunk, covering her face with her fingers, crying bitterly, shaking her bare brownish shoulders. Natasha's face, the name day, animated all day and even more shining now during the preparation for singing, which always had an exciting effect on her, suddenly dimmed. Her eyes stopped, then her broad neck, born for singing, shuddered, the corners of her lips drooped, her eyes moistened in an instant.

- Sonya! What are you doing?.. What, what's wrong with you? Oooh-ooh!.. - And Natasha, opening her big mouth and becoming completely silly, began to cry like a child, not knowing the reason and only because Sonya was crying. Sonya wanted to raise her head, wanted to answer, but she couldn't and hid even more. Natasha was crying, sitting down on the blue feather bed and hugging her friend. Gathering her strength, Sonya raised herself, began to wipe away her tears and tell her story.

- Nikolai... is leaving in a week, his... paper... came out... he told me himself... But I wouldn't cry anyway... (she showed the paper she was holding in her hand: it was a poem written by Nikolai), I wouldn't cry anyway, but you can't... no one can understand... what kind of soul he has...

And she began to cry again because his soul was so good. Sonya felt that no one but she could understand all the charm and height, nobility and tenderness - all the best virtues of this soul. And she really saw all these incomparable virtues, firstly, because Nikolai, without knowing it, showed himself to her only one, the best, side, and secondly, because with all the strength of her soul she wanted to see only the beautiful in him.

“You are happy… I don’t envy you… I love you, and Boris too,” she said, gathering her strength a little, “he is dear… there are no obstacles for you. And Nikolai is my cousin… I must… the metropolitan himself… and even that is impossible. And then, if Mama (Sonya considered and called the Countess her mother)… she will say that I am ruining Nikolai’s career, that I have no heart, that I am ungrateful, but really… by God (she crossed herself)… I love her so much, and all of you, only Vera alone… Why? What have I done to her? I am so grateful to you that I would be glad to sacrifice everything, but I have nothing…”

Sonya could no longer speak and again hid her head in her hands and the feather bed. Natasha began to calm down, but it was clear from her face that she understood the full importance of her friend's grief.

- Sonya! - she said suddenly, as if guessing the real reason for her cousin's disappointment. - Surely Vera spoke to you after dinner? Yes?

- Yes, Nikolay himself wrote these verses, and I copied others; she found them on my table and said that she would show them to Mama, and she also said that I was ungrateful, that Mama would never let him marry me. But he is marrying Julie. Do you see how she looks at him, Natasha? For what?

And again she began to cry more bitterly than before. Natasha lifted her up, hugged her and, smiling through her tears, began to calm her down.

- Sonya, don't believe her, my dear, don't believe her. Remember how the three of us talked with Nikolai in the living room, remember, after supper? After all, we had decided how it would be. I don't remember how, but remember how everything was fine and everything was possible. Now, Uncle Shinshin's brother is married to his cousin, and we are second cousins. And Boris said that it was very possible. You know, I told him everything. And he is so smart and so good, - Natasha said, just like Sonya in relation to Nikolai, and for the same reasons feeling that no one in the world, except her, could know all the treasures contained in Boris... - You, Sonya, don't cry, my dear darling, my dear Sonya. - And she kissed her, laughing. - Vera is evil, God be with her. But everything will be fine, and she won't tell Mama, Nikolai will tell himself.

And she kissed her on the head. Sonya raised herself up, and the kitten perked up, his eyes sparkled, and he seemed ready to wave his tail, jump up on his soft paws and play with the ball again, as was proper for him.

“You think so? Really? Honestly?” she said, quickly straightening her dress and hair.

- Really, by God! - answered Natasha, straightening a strand of coarse hair that had fallen out under her friend's braid, and they both laughed. - Well, let's go sing "The Key."

- Let's go.

Sonya, shaking off the fluff and hiding the poems in her bosom to her neck with protruding chest bones, with light, cheerful steps, with a flushed face, ran together with Natasha along the corridor to the living room. Nikolai was still singing the last verse of the song. He saw Sonya, his eyes came alive, a smile was ready on his open mouth for the sounds, his voice became stronger and more expressive, and he sang the last verse even better than before.

		On a pleasant night, in the moonlight,

- he sang, looking at Sonya, and they understood how much it all meant - the words, the smile, and the song, although, in fact, it all meant nothing.

		On a pleasant night, in the moonlight,
		Imagine yourself happily,
		That there is still someone in the world,
		Who thinks about you too!
		That she, with a beautiful hand
		Wandering along the golden harp,
		With its passionate harmony
		He calls you to himself, he calls you!
		Another day or two and paradise will come.
		But, ah! your friend won't live to see it!

He sang for Sonya alone, but everyone felt cheerful and good in their hearts when he finished and stood up from the clavichord with moist eyes.

- Charming! Enchanting! - was heard from all sides.

"This romance," Julie said with a sigh, approaching him, "is delight. I understand everything."

While singing, Marya Dmitrievna got up from the table and stopped at the door to listen.

- Well done, Nikolai, - she said. - It gets into my soul. Come and kiss me.




XXVII


Natasha whispered to Nikolai that Vera had already upset Sonya by stealing her poems and saying unpleasant things to her. Nikolai blushed and immediately walked up to Vera with a decisive step and began to whisper that if she dared to do anything unpleasant to Sonya, he would be her enemy for life. Vera made excuses, apologized, and also whispered that it was improper to talk about this, pointing to the guests who, noticing that there was some unpleasantness between the brother and sister, left them.

“I don’t care, I’ll tell everyone,” Nikolai said almost loudly, “that you have a bad heart and that you find pleasure in harming people.

Having finished this business, Nikolai, still trembling with excitement, went to the far corner of the room, where Boris and Pierre were standing. He sat down next to them with the resolute and gloomy look of a man who is now ready for anything and to whom it is better not to address any question. Pierre, however, with his usual absent-mindedness, not noticing his state of mind and being in the most good-natured state, which was strengthened by the pleasant impression of music, which always had a strong effect on him, despite the fact that he could never play a single note without being out of tune, Pierre turned to him:

“How wonderfully you sang!” he said.

Nikolai did not answer.

“What rank do you hold in the regiment?” he asked, in order to ask something else.

Nikolai, not realizing that Pierre was not at all to blame for the unpleasantness caused to him by Vera and for Julie’s pestering that had become tiresome to him, looked angrily at him.

“They offered to work for my enrollment as a chamberlain, and I refused, because I want to be obliged only to my dignity for my position in the army, and not to sit on the heads of people more worthy than me. I am going as a cadet,” he added, very pleased that he was able to immediately show his new acquaintance his nobility and use the military expression: “to sit on the head,” which he had just overheard from the colonel.

- Yes, we always argue with him, - said Boris. - I don't find anything unfair to act directly as a major. If you are not worthy of this rank, you will be turned off, but if you are worthy, then you are more likely to be useful.

“Well, you’re a diplomat,” said Nikolai. “I consider this an abuse for myself and I don’t want to start an abuse.”

"You are absolutely, absolutely right," said Pierre. "What are these, musicians? Are they going to dance?" he asked timidly, hearing the sounds of tuning. "I have never been able to learn a single dance."

“Yes, I think Mama ordered it,” Nikolai answered, gleefully looking around the room and mentally choosing his own from among the ladies. But at that moment he saw a circle gathered around Berg, and the good mood that had returned to him was again replaced by gloomy bitterness.

- Oh, read it, Mr. Berg, you read so well, it must be very poetic, - Julie said to Berg, who was holding a piece of paper in his hand. Nikolai saw that these were his poems, which Vera, out of revenge, showed to the whole company. The poems were as follows:

Farewell of the Hussar

		Don't torment me with separation,
		Don't torment your hussar;
		A hussar's saber is his guarantee
		Wishes for your happiness.
		I need courage to fight,
		Even more necessary for your tears,
		I want to win the hero's crown,
		To lay at your feet.

Having written the verses and given them to the object of his passion, Nikolai thought that they were beautiful, but now he suddenly found that they were extremely bad and, most importantly, ridiculous. Seeing Berg with his verses in his hands, Nikolai stopped, his nostrils flared, his face turned purple, and, pressing his lips together, he walked quickly and decisively waving his arms towards the circle. Boris, seeing his intention in time, cut him off and took him by the hand.

- Look, this would be stupid.

“Leave me alone, I’ll teach him a lesson,” Nikolai said, rushing forward.

- It's not his fault, let me go.

Boris approached Berg.

“These poems are not written for everyone,” he said, holding out his hand. “Allow me!”

- Ah, this is not for everyone! Vera Ilyinichna gave it to me.

“It’s so beautiful, there’s something very melodic here,” said Julie Akhrosimova.

“The Hussar’s Farewell,” said Berg and had the misfortune to smile.

Nikolai was already standing in front of him, holding his face close to his and looking at him with heated eyes that seemed to pierce the unfortunate Berg right through.

- Do you find it funny? What do you find funny?

- No, I didn’t know that it was you...

- What business is it of yours whether it is me or not? It is not noble to read other people's letters.

“Sorry,” Berg said, blushing and frightened.

"Nikolai," said Boris, "Monsieur Berg did not read other people's letters... Now you will do something stupid. Listen," he said, putting the poems in his pocket, "come here, I need to talk to you."

Berg immediately went over to the ladies, and Boris and Nikolai went out into the sofa room. Sonya ran out after them.

Half an hour later all the young people were already dancing ecossaise, and Nikolai, having talked with Sonya in the sofa room, was the same cheerful and agile dancer as always, he himself was surprised at his own irascibility and annoyed at his indecent behavior.

Everyone was having a lot of fun. Pierre, who mixed up the figures and danced ecossaise under Boris's direction, and Natasha, who for some reason died laughing every time she looked at him, which pleased him very much.

“How funny and how nice he is,” she said first to Boris, and then spoke directly to Pierre himself, looking at him naively from below.

In the middle of the third ecossaise, the chairs in the drawing room where the Count and Marya Dmitrievna were playing began to move, and most of the guests of honor and the old men, stretching after a long sitting and putting their wallets and purses in their pockets, came out through the doors of the hall. Marya Dmitrievna and the Count walked in front, both with cheerful faces. The Count, with playful politeness, somehow like a ballet dancer, extended his rounded hand to Marya Dmitrievna. He straightened up, and his face lit up with a particularly dashing, sly smile, and as soon as they had finished dancing the last figure of the ecossaise, he clapped the musicians' hands and shouted to the choir, addressing the first violin.

- Semyon! Do you know Danila Kupor?

This was the Count's favorite dance, which he danced in his youth (Danila Kupor was actually one of the figures of the English dance.)

“Look at daddy,” Natasha shouted to the whole room, bending her curly head to her knees and bursting into her ringing laughter throughout the entire room.

Indeed, everything in the hall looked with a smile of joy at the cheerful old man, who, next to his dignified lady, Marya Dmitrievna, who was taller than he, was rounding his arms, shaking them in time, straightening his shoulders, twisting his legs, stamping his feet slightly, and with an ever-broadening smile on his round face, was preparing the spectators for what was to come. As soon as the cheerful, provocative sounds of Danila Kupor, similar to a merry chatterbox, were heard, all the doors of the hall were suddenly filled on one side with male, on the other with female smiling faces of servants who had come out to look at the merry master.

- Our father! An eagle! - said the nanny from one of the doors.

The Count danced well and knew it, but his lady did not know how to dance well and did not want to. Her huge body stood straight with her powerful arms hanging down (she handed the reticule to the Countess), only her stern but beautiful face danced. What was expressed in the whole round figure of the Count, in Marya Dmitrievna was expressed only in her increasingly smiling face and twitching nose. But if the Count, more and more getting going, captivated the spectators with the unexpectedness of his dexterous dodges and light jumps of his soft legs, Marya Dmitrievna, with the slightest zeal in moving her shoulders or rounding her arms, in turning and stamping, produced no less an impression by virtue of the merit that everyone appreciated despite her corpulence and usual severity. The dancing became more and more animated. The vis-à-vis could not attract attention to themselves for a moment and did not even try to do so. Everything was occupied by the Count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha tugged at the sleeves and dresses of all those present, who had not taken their eyes off the dancers anyway, and demanded that they look at papa. The Count, in the intervals of the dance, caught his breath heavily, waved and shouted to the musicians to play faster. Faster, faster and faster, more and more the Count turned around, now on tiptoe, now on heels, rushing around Marya Dmitrievna, and, finally, turning his lady to her place, he made the last step, raising his soft leg upward from behind, bowing his sweaty head with a smiling face and swinging his right arm roundly amid the roar of applause and laughter, especially from Natasha. Both dancers stopped, catching their breath heavily and wiping their faces with cambric handkerchiefs.

“That’s how they danced in our time, my dear,” said the count.

“Well done, Danila Kupor!” said Marya Dmitrievna, breathing heavily and for a long time.




XXVIII


While the Rostovs were dancing the sixth English dance in the hall to the sounds of tired, out-of-tune musicians, and the tired waiters and cooks were preparing supper, discussing among themselves how the gentlemen could eat so incessantly—they had just finished tea, and now they were going to supper again—at that time Count Bezukhov had already suffered his sixth stroke, the doctors had announced that there was no hope of recovery, the patient had been given a silent confession and communion, preparations were being made for the unction, and in the house there was the bustle and anxiety of expectation that were usual at such moments. Outside the house, behind the gates, undertakers were crowding, hiding from the approaching carriages, expecting a rich order for the Count's funeral. The commander-in-chief of Moscow, who was constantly sending adjutants to inquire about the Count's condition, himself came that evening to say goodbye to one of the representatives of Catherine's century. They said that the patient was looking for someone with his eyes and demanding someone. A footman was sent on horseback for both Pierre and Anna Mikhailovna.

The magnificent reception room was full. Everyone stood up respectfully when the commander-in-chief, having spent about half an hour alone with the sick man, came out, slightly returning bows and trying to pass as quickly as possible past the gazes of doctors, clergy and relatives directed at him. Prince Vasily, who had grown thin and pale over the past few days, walked beside him, and everyone saw how the commander-in-chief shook his hand and quietly repeated something to him several times.

Having seen the commander-in-chief off, Prince Vasily sat down alone in the hall on a chair, crossed his legs high, resting his elbow on his knee and covering his eyes with his hand. Everyone saw that he was having a hard time, and no one approached him. After sitting like that for some time, he stood up and with unusually quick steps, looking around with either angry or frightened eyes, walked through the long corridor to the back half of the house to the eldest princess.

Those in the dimly lit room spoke among themselves in uneven whispers and fell silent each time, and with eyes full of question and expectation they looked at the door that led to the dying man's chambers and made a faint sound when someone came out of it or entered it.

“The human limit,” said the old man, a clergyman, to the lady who sat down next to him and naively listened to him. “And a limit is set, which you cannot go beyond.”

“I wonder if it’s too late to administer unction?” the lady asked, adding the spiritual title, as if she had no opinion of her own on the matter.

“A great mystery, Mother,” the clergyman answered, running his hands over his bald head, across which lay several strands of combed, half-gray hair.

- Who was that? Was it the commander-in-chief himself? - they asked from the other end of the room. - How youthful...

- And the seventh decade! What, they say, the count won't recognize him anymore? They wanted to give him the last rites.

– I knew one, he received unction seven times.

The second princess had just left the sick man’s room with tear-stained eyes and sat down next to Lorrain, a young, famous doctor, a Frenchman, who was sitting in a graceful pose next to the portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbows on the table.

“It’s wonderful,” said the doctor, answering a question about the weather, “the weather, princess, and then, Moscow is so similar to a village.”

“Isn’t that true?” said the princess, sighing. “So he can drink?”

Lorraine thought.

- Did he take his medicine?

- Yes.

The doctor looked at the Breguet.

– Take a glass of boiled water and add a pinch (he showed with his thin fingers what a pinch meant) of cream of tartar.

“Listen, don’t drink,” the German doctor said to the adjutant, “so that he survived the third blow.”

- And what a fresh man he was! - said the adjutant. - And who will benefit from this wealth? - he added in a whisper.

“There will be hunters,” the German answered, smiling.

Everyone looked back at the door again: it creaked, and the second princess, having made the drink shown by Lorrain, carried it to the patient. The German doctor approached Lorrain.

“Maybe it will last until tomorrow morning?” asked the German, pronouncing French poorly.

Lorren, pursing his lips, waved his finger sternly and negatively in front of his nose.

“Tonight, no later,” he said quietly, with a decent smile of self-satisfaction in the fact that he could clearly understand and express the patient’s situation, and walked away.



Meanwhile, Prince Vasily opened the door to the princess's room. The room was half-dark, only two lamps were burning in front of the icons and there was a pleasant smell of incense and flowers. The entire room was filled with small furniture: wardrobes, cupboards, tables. From behind the screens, the white covers of a high downy bed could be seen. The dog began to bark.

- Ah, it's you, cousin.

She stood up and straightened her hair, which was always, even now, so unusually smooth, as if it had been made from one piece with her head and covered with varnish.

"Did something happen?" she asked. "I was so scared already."

“Nothing, everything is the same, I just came to talk business with you, Katish,” said the prince, sitting down tiredly in the chair from which she had risen. “How you’ve heated things up, though,” he said, “well, sit down here, let’s talk.”

“I was wondering if something had happened?” said the princess, and with her unchanging, calm and strict stony decorum, she sat down opposite the prince, preparing to listen.

“Well, my dear?” said Prince Vasily, taking the princess’s hand and bending it downwards as was his habit.

It was clear that this “well what” referred to many things that, without being named, they both understood.

The princess, with her incongruously long legs and dry and straight waist, looked directly and dispassionately at the prince with her bulging grey eyes.

She shook her head and, sighing, looked at the icons. Her gesture could be explained as an expression of sadness and devotion, and as an expression of fatigue and hope for a quick rest. Prince Vasily explained this gesture as an expression of fatigue.

- And for me, - he said, - do you think it's easier? I'm exhausted like a post horse, but still I need to talk to you, Katish, and very seriously.

Prince Vasily fell silent, and his cheeks began to twitch nervously, first to one side, then to the other, giving his face an unpleasant expression, which never appeared on Prince Vasily's face when he was in drawing rooms. His eyes, too, were not as usual: sometimes they looked insolently and jokingly, sometimes they looked around fearfully.

The princess, holding the little dog on her knees with her dry, thin hands, looked attentively into the eyes of Prince Vasily; but it was clear that she would not break the silence with a question, even if she had to remain silent until the morning. The princess had one of those faces whose expression remains unchangeable and independent of the movements expressed on the face of the interlocutor.

“You see, my dear princess and cousin Ekaterina Semyonovna,” Prince Vasily continued, apparently not without an internal struggle as he began to continue his speech, “at moments like now, you have to think about everything. You have to think about the future, about you… I love you all like my own children, you know that.

The princess looked at him just as dimly and motionless.

- Finally, I must think about my family, - angrily pushing the table away from himself and not looking at her, Prince Vasily continued, - you know, Katish, that you, the three Mamontov sisters, and my wife, we are the only direct heirs of the Count. I know, I know how hard it is for you to talk and think about such things. And it is no easier for me, but, my friend, I am in my fifties, I must be prepared for anything. Do you know that I sent for Pierre and that the Count, pointing directly to his portrait, demanded that he come to him?

Prince Vasily looked questioningly at the princess, but could not understand whether she was understanding what he had told her or was simply looking at him.

“I never cease to pray to God for one thing,” she answered, “that he would have mercy on him and allow his beautiful soul to leave this…”

“Yes, that’s true,” Prince Vasily continued impatiently, rubbing his bald head and again angrily moving the table that had been pushed back towards him, “but, finally… finally, the thing is, you yourself know, that last winter the Count wrote a will, according to which he gave the entire estate, in addition to the direct heirs and us, to Pierre.

- He wrote many wills! - the princess said calmly. - But he couldn't have left a will to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate.

“My dear,” Prince Vasily said suddenly, pressing the table to himself, becoming animated and beginning to speak more quickly, “but what if the letter is written to the sovereign, and the Count asks to adopt Pierre? You understand, according to the Count’s merits, his request will be respected…”

The princess smiled as people smile who think they know more about a matter than those they are talking to.

- I will tell you more, - continued Prince Vasily, grabbing her hand, - the letter was written, although not sent, and the Emperor knew about it. The only question is whether it was destroyed or not. If not, then how soon will it all end - Prince Vasily sighed, making it clear what he meant by the words "it will all end" - and the Count's papers will be opened, the will with the letter will be handed over to the Emperor, and his request will certainly be respected. Pierre, as a legitimate son, will receive everything.

“And our unit?” asked the princess, smiling ironically, as if anything but this could happen.

- But, my dear Katish, it is as clear as day. He alone is then the legal heir to everything, and you will not receive any of this. You must know, my dear, whether the will and the letter were written and whether they were destroyed. And if for some reason they were forgotten, then you must know where they are and find them, because...

“That’s all we need!” interrupted the princess, smiling sardonically and without changing the expression in her eyes. “I am a woman, and in your opinion we are all stupid, but I know that an illegitimate son cannot inherit… Un b?tard,” she added, believing that this translation would finally show the prince his groundlessness.

- How can you not understand, Katish! You are so smart: how can you not understand that if the Count wrote a letter to the Emperor in which he asks him to recognize his son as legitimate, then Pierre will no longer be Pierre, but Count Bezukhov, and then he will receive everything according to the will? And if the will and the letter are not destroyed, then you will have nothing left except the consolation that you were virtuous and everything that follows from this. That is true.

“I know that the will has been written, but I also know that it is invalid, and you seem to consider me a complete fool,” said the princess with the expression with which women speak when they think they have said something witty and offensive.

- My dear princess, Ekaterina Semyonovna, - Prince Vasily began impatiently. - I have come to you not to quarrel with you, but to talk about your interests as with a dear, good, kind, true relative. I am telling you for the tenth time that if the letter to the sovereign and the will in favor of Pierre are in the Count's papers, then you, my dear, and your sisters, are not an heir. If you do not believe me, then believe those who know: I have just spoken with Dmitry Onufrievich (he was the lawyer of the house), he said the same thing.

Apparently, something suddenly changed in the princess’s thoughts: her thin lips turned pale (her eyes remained the same), and her voice, when she spoke, broke through with such peals that she herself apparently did not expect.

“That would be good,” she said. “I didn’t want anything and I don’t want anything.” She threw her little dog off her lap and straightened the folds of her dress. “This is gratitude, this is appreciation for the people who sacrificed everything for him,” she said. “Excellent! Very good! I don’t need anything, Prince.”

“Yes, but you are not alone, you have sisters,” answered Prince Vasily.

But the princess did not listen to him.

“Yes, I knew this for a long time, but I forgot that, except for baseness, deceit, envy, intrigue, except for ingratitude, the blackest ingratitude, I could not expect anything in this house...

“Do you know or don’t you know where this will is?” asked Prince Vasily, his cheeks twitching even more than before.

- Yes, I was stupid, I still believed in people, and loved them, and sacrificed myself. But only those who are mean and nasty succeed.

I know whose intrigues these are.

The princess wanted to get up, but the prince held her by the hand. The princess had the appearance of a person who had suddenly become disillusioned with the entire human race; she looked angrily at her interlocutor.

- There is still time, my friend. Remember, Katish, that all this happened by accident, in a moment of anger, illness, and then forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to correct his mistake, to make his last moments easier by not allowing him to commit this injustice, not to let him die thinking that he made those people unhappy...

"Those people who sacrificed everything for him," the princess picked up, trying to get up again, but the prince did not let her, "which he never knew how to value. No, cousin," she added with a sigh, "I will remember that in this world one cannot expect a reward, that in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one must be cunning and evil.

- Well, listen, calm down; I know your beautiful heart.

- No, I have an evil heart.

“I know your heart,” repeated the prince, “I value your friendship, and I wish you to think the same of me. Calm down and let us talk properly while there is time – perhaps a day, perhaps an hour; tell me all you know about the will, and, most importantly, where it is, you must know. We will take it now and show it to the Count. He has probably forgotten about it and will want to destroy it. You understand that my only desire is to sacredly fulfill his will; that is the only reason I came here. I am here only to help him and you.”

“Now I understand everything. I know whose intrigues these are. I know,” said the princess.

- That's not the point, my soul.

“This is your protégé, your dear Princess Drubetskaya, Anna Mikhailovna, whom I would not wish to have as a maid, this vile, disgusting woman.

- Let's not waste time.

- Oh, don't say it! Last winter she snuck in here and said such nasty things, such nasty things to the Count about all of us, especially about Sophia, I can't repeat them, - that the Count became ill and didn't want to see us for two weeks. At that time, I know that he wrote that nasty, vile paper, but I thought that this paper meant nothing.

- That's the point, why didn't you tell me anything before?

- In the mosaic briefcase that he keeps under his pillow! Now I know, - said the princess, without answering. - Yes, if there is a sin on my part, a great sin, it is hatred for this scoundrel, - the princess almost screamed, completely changed. - And why is she trying to get in here? But I will tell her everything, everything. The time will come.

"For God's sake, do not forget in your justified anger," said Prince Vasily, smiling slightly, "that the thousand-eyed envy is watching us. We must act, but..."




XXIX


While such conversations were going on in the reception room and the princess's room, the carriage with Pierre (who had been sent for) and Anna Mikhailovna (who had found it necessary to go with him) was driving into Count Bezukhov's courtyard. When the wheels of the carriage began to softly sound on the straw laid under the windows, Anna Mikhailovna, turning to her companion with words of comfort, made sure that he was sleeping in the corner of the carriage and woke him. Having come to, Pierre got out of the carriage after Anna Mikhailovna and only then thought about the meeting with his dying father that awaited him. He noticed that they had driven up to the back entrance, not the front one. While he was getting off the step, two men in bourgeois clothes hurried away from the entrance into the shadow of the wall. Pierre paused and saw several more of the same people in the shadow of the house on both sides. But neither Anna Mikhailovna, nor the footman, nor the coachman, who could not help but see these people, paid any attention to them. "So this must be so," Pierre decided to himself and followed Anna Mikhailovna. Anna Mikhailovna walked quickly up the dimly lit, narrow, stone staircase, calling to Pierre, who was lagging behind her. Although he did not understand why he had to go to the count at all, and even less why he had to go by the back staircase, judging by Anna Mikhailovna's confidence and haste, he decided to himself that it was absolutely necessary. Halfway up the stairs they were nearly knocked down by some people with buckets, who, clattering with their boots, ran to meet them. These people pressed themselves against the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhailovna pass, and did not show the slightest surprise at the sight of them.

“Are there half of the princesses here?” Anna Mikhailovna asked one of them.

“Here,” answered the footman in a bold, loud voice, as if now everything was possible, “the door to the left, mother.”

“Perhaps the Count did not call me,” said Pierre, as he went out onto the landing, “I would have gone to my room.”

Anna Mikhailovna stopped to catch up with Pierre.

“Ah, my friend,” she said with the same gesture as she had made with her son in the morning, touching his hand, “believe me, I suffer no less than you, but be a man.”

“Really, I’ll go,” Pierre asked, looking affectionately through his glasses at Anna Mikhailovna.

- Forget, my friend, what was wrong against you. Remember that it was your father... perhaps in agony. - She sighed. - I immediately loved you as a son. Trust me, Pierre. I will not forget your interests.

Pierre did not understand anything; again it seemed to him even more strongly that all this must be so, and he obediently followed Anna Mikhailovna, who was already opening the door.

The door opened into the front room of the back. In the corner sat an old servant of the princesses, knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been in this half of the room, and had not even supposed that such chambers existed. Anna Mikhailovna asked the girl who was overtaking them with a decanter on a tray, calling her sweet and darling, about the health of the princesses, and pulled Pierre further along the stone corridor. From the corridor, the first door on the left led to the living quarters of the princesses. The maid with the decanter, in a hurry (as everything was done in a hurry at that moment in this house), did not close the door, and Pierre and Anna Mikhailovna, passing by, involuntarily glanced into the room where the eldest princess and Prince Vasily were sitting close to each other, talking. Seeing those passing by, Prince Vasily made an impatient movement and leaned back, the princess jumped up and with a desperate gesture slammed the door with all her might, closing it.

This gesture was so unlike the princess's usual calm, the fear expressed on Prince Vasily's face was so uncharacteristic of his importance, that Pierre, stopping, looked questioningly through his glasses at his mentor. Anna Mikhailovna did not express surprise, she only smiled slightly and sighed, as if to show that she had expected all this.

“Be a man, my friend, and I will look after your interests,” she said in response to his gaze and walked even faster down the corridor.

Pierre did not understand what was going on, and even less what it meant to look after interests, but he understood that it all had to be this way. They went out through the corridor into a half-lit hall adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those cold and luxurious rooms that Pierre knew from the front porch. But in this room, too, there was an empty bathtub in the middle and water had been spilled on the carpet. A servant and a clerk with a censer came out to meet them on tiptoe, paying no attention to them. They entered the reception room familiar to Pierre with two Italian windows, an exit to the winter garden, with a large bust and a full-length portrait of Catherine. All the same people, in almost the same positions, sat whispering in the reception room. Everyone fell silent and looked back at Anna Mikhailovna, who had entered, with her tear-stained, pale face, and at the fat, large Pierre, who, with his head down, obediently followed her.

Anna Mikhailovna's face expressed the consciousness that the decisive moment had arrived, and she, with the manners of a businesslike Petersburg lady, entered the room, not letting Pierre go, even more boldly than in the morning. She apparently felt that, leading behind her the one whom the dying man wished to see, her reception was assured. With a quick glance at everyone in the room and noticing the Count's confessor, she, not so much bending over as suddenly becoming shorter in stature, swam with a small amble up to the confessor and respectfully accepted the blessing of one, then another clergyman.

“Thank God I made it,” she said to the clergyman, “we, my family, were so afraid. This young man is the count’s son,” she added more quietly. “A terrible moment!”

Having said these words, she approached the doctor.

“Dear doctor,” she said to him, “this young man is the count’s son… Is there any hope?”

The doctor silently, with a quick movement, raised his eyes and shoulders. Anna Mikhailovna raised her shoulders and eyes with exactly the same movement, almost closing them, sighed and moved away from the doctor to Pierre. She addressed Pierre with particular respect and tenderly sadness:

“Trust yourself in His mercy,” she said to him, and, pointing out a small sofa for him to sit on to wait for her, she herself quietly walked towards the door at which everyone was looking, and, following the barely audible sound of this door, disappeared behind it.

Pierre, having decided to obey his guide in everything, went to the little sofa which she had indicated to him. As soon as Anna Mikhailovna had disappeared, he noticed that the glances of all those in the room were directed at him with more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that everyone was whispering, pointing at him with their eyes as if with fear and even with servility. They showed him a respect such as had never been shown before: a lady unknown to him, who had been talking with the clergy, rose from her seat and invited him to sit down; an adjutant picked up the glove Pierre had dropped and handed it to him. The doctors respectfully fell silent as he passed them and stepped aside to make room for him. Pierre wanted to sit down in another place at first, so as not to inconvenience the lady, he wanted to pick up the glove himself and go around the doctors, who were not at all standing in his way; but he suddenly felt that it would be improper, he felt that he was a person that night who was obliged to perform some terrible and expected ceremony, and that therefore he had to accept services from everyone. He silently accepted the glove from the adjutant, sat down in the lady's place, placing his large hands on his symmetrically extended knees, in the naive pose of an Egyptian statue, and deciding to himself that all this should be exactly like that and that he should not act according to his own considerations that evening, in order not to get lost and not to do stupid things, but must submit himself entirely to the will of those who guided him.

Not two minutes had passed when Prince Vasily, in his caftan with three stars, majestically, holding his head high, entered the room. He seemed thinner since the morning; his eyes were larger than usual when he looked around the room and saw Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (which he had never done before) and pulled it down, as if he wanted to test whether it was firmly held.

- Take courage, take courage, my friend. He wished to see you. That is good... - and he wanted to go. But Pierre considered it necessary to ask:

“How are you…” He hesitated, not knowing whether it was proper to call a dying man a count, but he was ashamed to call him father.

- He had another stroke, half an hour ago. Take courage, my friend...

Pierre was in such a state of confusion that the word "blow" made him imagine a blow from some body. He looked at Prince Vasily in bewilderment. And only later did he realize that a blow was an illness. Prince Vasily said a few words to Lorrain as he walked and walked through the door on tiptoe. He did not know how to walk on tiptoe and awkwardly jumped with his whole body. The eldest princess walked after him, then the clergy and the clergy walked, and the servants also walked through the door. There was a sound of movement behind this door, and finally, with the same pale but firm face in the fulfillment of her duty, Anna Mikhailovna ran out and, touching Pierre's hand, said:

- God's mercy is inexhaustible. The unction will begin now. Let's go.

Pierre walked through the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed that the adjutant, and the unfamiliar lady, and one of the other servants, all walked behind him, as if now there was no need to ask permission to enter this room.




XXX


Pierre knew this large room, divided by columns and an arch, all upholstered in Persian carpets, well. The part of the room behind the columns, where on one side stood a high mahogany bed with silk curtains, and on the other a huge icon case with icons, was redly and brightly lit, as churches are lit during the evening service. Under the illuminated vestments of the icon case stood a long Voltairean armchair, and on the armchair, lined at the top with snow-white, unrumpled, apparently recently changed pillows, covered to the waist with a bright green blanket, lay the majestic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, familiar to Pierre, with the same gray mane of hair, reminiscent of a lion, over a broad forehead, and with the same characteristically noble, large wrinkles on a handsome red-yellow face. He lay directly under the icons; both his thick large hands were straightened out from under the blanket and lay on it. In his right hand, palm down, between the thumb and forefinger was inserted a wax candle, which an old servant, bending over the chair, held in it. Above the chair stood the clergy in their majestic, shining robes, with their long hair spread out on them, with lighted candles in their hands, and they served slowly and solemnly. A little behind them stood the two younger princesses, with a kerchief in their hands and over their eyes, and in front of them the eldest, Katish, with an angry and determined look, not taking her eyes off the icons for a moment, as if telling everyone that she would not be responsible for herself if she looked back. Anna Mikhailovna, with meek sadness and all-forgiveness on her face, and the unknown lady stood at the door. Prince Vasily stood on the other side of the door, close to the armchair, behind a carved velvet chair, which he had turned with its back to himself, and, resting his left hand with the candle on it, he crossed himself with his right, raising his eyes upward each time he placed his fingers on his forehead. His face expressed calm piety and devotion to the will of God. "If you do not understand these feelings, then so much the worse for you," his face seemed to say.

Behind him stood an adjutant, doctors and male servants; as if in a church, men and women separated. All was silent, crossing themselves, only the church reading, restrained, deep, bass singing and, in moments of silence, the shifting of feet and sighs could be heard. Anna Mikhailovna, with that significant look that showed that she knew what she was doing, crossed the room to Pierre and handed him a candle. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him, began to cross himself with the same hand that held the candle.

The younger princess, Sophie, rosy and laughing, with a mole, looked at him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief and did not open it for a long time, but, looking at Pierre, she laughed again. She apparently felt unable to look at him without laughing, but she could not help looking at him, and to avoid temptation she quietly went behind the column. In the middle of the service the voices of the clergy suddenly fell silent, the clergy whispered something to each other; the old servant who held the count's hand rose and addressed the ladies. Anna Mikhailovna stepped forward and, bending over the sick man from behind his back, beckoned Lorrain with her finger. The French doctor, who stood without a lighted candle, leaning against a column, in that respectful attitude of a foreigner which shows that, despite the difference in faith, he understands the full importance of the rite being performed and even approves of it, with the noiseless steps of a man in all the strength of age approached the patient, took his free hand from the green blanket with his white thin fingers and, turning away, began to feel his pulse and thought. They gave the patient something to drink, they began to stir around him, then again they parted to their places, and the service was resumed. During this pause, Pierre noticed that Prince Vasily came out from behind the back of his chair and, with the same look which showed that he knew what he was doing, and that it was so much the worse for the others if they did not understand him, did not approach the patient, but, passing him, joined the eldest princess and with her went into the depths of the bedroom, to the high bed under the silk curtains. From the bed both the prince and the princess disappeared through the back door; but before the end of the service they returned one after the other to their places. Pierre paid no more attention to this circumstance than to all the others, having once and for all decided in his mind that everything that had happened before him that evening was so absolutely necessary.

The sounds of church singing ceased, and the voice of a clergyman was heard, respectfully congratulating the patient on receiving the sacrament. The patient lay lifeless and motionless. Everything around him began to stir, footsteps and whispers were heard, of which Anna Mikhailovna's whisper stood out the most sharply.

Pierre heard her say:

- We definitely need to move it to the bed, there’s no way it’s possible here...

The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses and servants that Pierre no longer saw that red-yellow head with its grey mane which, despite the fact that he had seen other faces, had not left his sight for a moment during the entire service. Pierre guessed from the cautious movement of the people surrounding the chair that the dying man was being lifted and carried.

“Hold on to my hand, or you’ll drop it,” he heard the frightened whisper of one of the servants, “from below… another one,” the voices said, and the heavy breathing and footsteps of the people became more rapid, as if the weight they were carrying was beyond their strength.

The bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhailovna, drew level with the young man, and for a moment, from behind the backs and necks of the people, he saw a high, fat, open chest, the fat shoulders of the sick man, raised upward by the people holding him under the arms, and a gray, curly leonine head. This head with an unusually wide forehead and cheekbones, a beautiful sensual mouth and a majestic, cold gaze was not disfigured by the proximity of death. It was the same as Pierre had known it three months ago, when the count had let him go to Petersburg. But this head swayed helplessly from the uneven steps of the bearers, and the cold, indifferent gaze did not know where to stop.

A few minutes of bustle passed around the high bed; the people carrying the sick man dispersed; Anna Mikhailovna touched Pierre's hand and said to him: "Let's go." Pierre and she approached the bed, on which the sick man was laid in a festive pose, apparently related to the sacrament that had just been performed. He lay with his head resting high on the pillows. His hands were laid out symmetrically on the green silk blanket, palms down. When Pierre approached, the count was looking straight at him, but he looked with that look whose meaning and significance cannot be understood by a person. Either this look said absolutely nothing, only that as long as there are eyes, one must look somewhere, or it said too much. Pierre stopped, not knowing what to do, and looked questioningly at his guide, Anna Mikhailovna. Anna Mikhailovna made a hasty gesture with her eyes, pointing to the sick man's hand and blowing it a kiss with her lips. Pierre, carefully stretching his neck so as not to catch it in the blanket, followed her advice and kissed the broad-boned and fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a single muscle of the Count's face twitched. Pierre again looked questioningly at Anna Mikhailovna, asking what he should do now. Anna Mikhailovna pointed with her eyes to the armchair standing next to the bed. Pierre obediently began to sit down in the armchair, continuing to ask with her eyes whether he had done what was necessary. Anna Mikhailovna nodded her head approvingly. Pierre again assumed the symmetrical, naive position of an Egyptian statue, apparently sympathizing with the fact that his clumsy and fat body occupied such a large space, and using all his spiritual strength to seem as small as possible. He looked at the Count. The Count looked at the place where Pierre's face had been while he was standing. Anna Mikhailovna showed in her expression the consciousness of the touching importance of this last minute of the meeting between father and son. It lasted two minutes, which seemed an hour to Pierre. Suddenly a shudder appeared in the large muscles and wrinkles of the count's face. The shudder grew stronger, the beautiful mouth twisted (only then did Pierre understand to what extent his father was close to death), from the twisted mouth an unclear hoarse sound was heard. Anna Mikhailovna carefully looked into the patient's eyes and, trying to guess what he needed, pointed first to Pierre, then to a drink, then in a questioning whisper called Prince Vasily, then pointed to the blanket. The patient's eyes and face showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant, who stood constantly at the head of the bed.

“They want to turn over onto their other side,” the servant whispered and stood up to turn the count’s heavy body over so that it faced the wall.

Pierre stood up to help the servant.

As they turned the Count over, one of his arms fell helplessly backwards, and he made a futile effort to drag it over. Whether the Count noticed the look of horror with which Pierre looked at that lifeless arm, or what other thought flashed through his dying mind at that moment, he looked at the disobedient arm, at the expression of horror on Pierre’s face, and again at the arm, and on his face there appeared a weak, suffering smile that was so out of keeping with his features, expressing a sort of mockery of his own impotence. Suddenly, at the sight of that smile, Pierre felt a shudder in his chest, a tingling in his nose, and tears blurred his vision. The sick man was turned on his side against the wall. He sighed.

“He dozed off,” said Anna Mikhailovna, noticing the princess coming to take her place. “Let’s go.”

Pierre went out.




XXXI


There was no one left in the reception room except Prince Vasily and the eldest princess, who were sitting under Catherine's portrait and talking animatedly about something. As soon as they saw Pierre with his leader, they fell silent. The princess hid something, as it seemed to Pierre, and whispered:

- I can't see this woman.

“Katish ordered tea to be served in the small living room,” Prince Vasily said to Anna Mikhailovna, “you should go, my poor Anna Mikhailovna, to have some refreshment, otherwise there won’t be enough of you.”

He said nothing to Pierre, only shook his hand with feeling below the shoulder. Pierre and Anna Mikhailovna went into the small living room.

“Nothing restores one after a sleepless night like a cup of this excellent Russian tea,” said Lorrain, with an expression of restrained animation, sipping from a thin, handleless Chinese cup, standing in the small round drawing-room before the table on which stood the tea-set and a cold supper.

Around the table, to refresh themselves, all who were in Count Bezukhov's house that night, gathered. Pierre remembered well that small round drawing room, with its mirrors and small tables. During balls at the Count's house, Pierre, who did not know how to dance, loved to sit in that small mirror room and watch how the ladies in ball gowns, with diamonds and pearls on their bare shoulders, passing through that room, looked at themselves in the brightly lit mirrors, which repeated their reflections several times. Now that same room was barely lit by two candles, and in the middle of the night, on one small table, tea sets and dishes stood in disarray, and various, non-festive people, whispering to each other, sat in it, showing with every movement, every word, that no one had forgotten what was happening now and was yet to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did not eat, although he was very hungry. He glanced questioningly at his guide and saw that she was tiptoeing back into the reception room, where Prince Vasily remained with the eldest princess. Pierre thought that this was also necessary, and after hesitating a little, he followed her. Anna Mikhailovna stood next to the princess, and both of them were simultaneously speaking in an excited whisper:

“Allow me, princess, to know what is necessary and what is not necessary,” said the princess, apparently in the same agitated state in which she had been when she slammed the door of her room.

“But, dear princess,” Anna Mikhailovna said meekly and convincingly, blocking the way from the bedroom and not letting the princess in, “wouldn’t it be too hard for poor uncle at such moments when he needs rest? At such moments, talking about worldly things, when his soul is already prepared…”

Prince Vasily sat on the armchair in his familiar pose, with his legs crossed high. His cheeks jumped strongly and, having fallen, seemed thicker at the bottom, but he had the appearance of a man who was not very much occupied with the conversation of two ladies.

- Listen, my dear Anna Mikhailovna, leave Katish to do what she knows. You know how the Count loves her.

“I don’t even know what’s in this paper,” said the princess, turning to Prince Vasily and pointing to the mosaic briefcase she was holding in her hands. “I only know that the real will is in his bureau, and this is the forgotten paper...” She wanted to go around Anna Mikhailovna, but Anna Mikhailovna, jumping up, blocked her way again.

“I know, my dear, kind princess,” said Anna Mikhailovna, clutching the briefcase with her hand so tightly that it was obvious she would not let go of it anytime soon. “Dear princess, I beg you, I implore you, have pity on him. I beg you.”

The princess was silent. Only the sounds of the struggle for the briefcase could be heard. It was clear that if she spoke, she would not speak in a flattering way for Anna Mikhailovna. Anna Mikhailovna held on tightly, but despite this, her voice retained all its sweet viscousness and softness.

- Pierre, come here, my friend. I think he would not be out of place in the family council, wouldn't you, Prince?

"Why are you silent, cousin?" the princess suddenly screamed so loudly that her voice was heard and frightened in the drawing room. "Why are you silent when God knows who allows themselves to interfere and make scenes on the threshold of a dying man's room. Intriguer!" she whispered angrily and yanked the briefcase with all her might, but Anna Mikhailovna took a few steps to keep up with the briefcase and intercepted his hand.

- Oh! - said Prince Vasily, reproachfully and surprised. He stood up. - This is ridiculous. Come on, let me go. I'm telling you.

The princess let him in.

- And you.

Anna Mikhailovna did not listen to him.

- Let me go, I tell you. I'll take it all upon myself. I'll go and ask him. I... that's enough for you.

- But, Prince... - said Anna Mikhailovna, - after such a great sacrament, give him a moment of peace. Here, Pierre, tell me your opinion, - she turned to the young man who, having come close to them, looked in surprise at the embittered face of the princess, which had lost all decency, and at the jumping cheeks of Prince Vasily.

“Remember that you will be responsible for all the consequences,” Prince Vasily said sternly, “you don’t know what you’re doing.”

“You disgusting woman!” the princess screamed, suddenly throwing herself at Anna Mikhailovna and snatching the briefcase.

Prince Vasily lowered his head and spread his arms.

At that moment the door, that terrible door which Pierre had been looking at for so long and which had opened so quietly, quickly and noisily swung open, slamming against the wall, and the middle princess ran out of there and threw up her hands.

"What are you doing?" she said desperately. "He's dying, and you're leaving me alone."

The eldest princess dropped her briefcase. Anna Mikhailovna quickly bent down and, picking up the disputed item, ran into the bedroom. The eldest princess and Prince Vasily, having come to their senses, followed her. A few minutes later, the eldest princess was the first to emerge, with a pale and dry face and a bitten lower lip. At the sight of Pierre, her face expressed uncontrollable anger. “Yes, rejoice now,” she said, “you were waiting for this.” And, bursting into tears, she covered her face with a handkerchief and ran out of the room.

Prince Vasily followed the princess. He staggered to the sofa where Pierre was sitting and fell on it, covering his eyes with his hand. Pierre noticed that he was pale and that his lower jaw was jumping and shaking as if in a feverish tremor.

“Oh, my friend!” he said, taking Pierre by the elbow, and there was a sincerity and weakness in his voice that Pierre had never noticed in him before. “How much we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am in my fifties, my friend… after all, I… It will all end in death, everything. Death is terrible.” He began to cry.

Anna Mikhailovna was the last to leave. She approached Pierre with quiet, slow steps.

“Pierre!..” she said.

Pierre looked at her questioningly. She kissed the young man's forehead, moistening it with tears. She was silent.

- He's gone...

Pierre looked at her through his glasses.

- Come, I'll see you out. Try to cry; nothing relieves like tears.

She led him into the dark drawing room, and Pierre was glad that no one there saw his face. Anna Mikhailovna left him, and when she returned, he was fast asleep, his hand under his head.

Having woken him up, Anna Mikhailovna said to Pierre:

- Yes, my friend, it is a great loss to us all, not to mention you. But God will support you, you are young, and now, I hope, the possessor of great wealth. The will has not yet been opened. I know you well enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes duties on you, and you must be a man.

Pierre remained silent.

- Later I may tell you that if I had not been there, God knows what would have happened. You know that uncle promised me three days ago not to forget Boris, but he did not have time. I hope, my friend, that you will fulfill your father's wish.

Pierre did not understand anything and silently, blushing shyly, which rarely happened to him, looked at Princess Anna Mikhailovna. After talking with Pierre, Anna Mikhailovna went to the Rostovs and went to bed. Waking up in the morning, she told the Rostovs and all her friends the details of Count Bezukhov's death. She said that the Count died as she would have liked to die, that his end was not only touching but also edifying, and that the last meeting between father and son was so touching that she could not remember it without tears and that she did not know who behaved better in those terrible and solemn minutes: the father, who remembered everything and everyone in his last minutes and said such touching words to his son, or Pierre, whom it was a pity to look at, how he was killed and how, despite this, he tried to hide his sadness so as not to upset his dying father.

“It is hard, but it is salutary; the soul is elevated when you see such people as the old count and his worthy son,” she said. She also spoke about the actions of the princess and Prince Vasily, although she did not approve of them, but in great secrecy and in a whisper.




XXXII


In Lysye Gory, the estate of Prince Nikolai Andreevich Bolkonsky, they were expecting the arrival of the young Prince Andrei and the Princess every day, but the expectation did not disturb the harmonious order in which life went in the house of the old Prince. General-in-Chief Prince Nikolai Andreevich, nicknamed in society the Prussian King, from the time when he was exiled to the village under Paul, lived without leaving his Lysye Gory with his daughter, Princess Marya, and with her companion Mademoiselle Bourienne. And in the current reign, although he was allowed to enter the capitals, he also continued to live without leaving the village, saying that if someone needed him, then he would travel one hundred and fifty miles from Moscow to Lysye Gory, and that he did not need anyone or anything. He said that there are only two sources of human vices: idleness and superstition, and that there are only two virtues: activity and intelligence. He himself was engaged in the education of his daughter and, in order to develop both main virtues in her, until she was twenty years old he gave her lessons in algebra and geometry and distributed her entire life in continuous studies. He himself was constantly busy either writing his memoirs, or calculating higher mathematics, or turning snuffboxes on a lathe, or working in the garden and supervising the constructions that were constantly underway on his estate, or reading his favorite authors.

Since the main condition for activity is order, the order in his way of life was brought to the last degree of precision. His appearances at the table took place under the same invariable conditions, and not only at the same hour, but also at the same minute. With the people surrounding him, from his daughter to his servants, the prince was abrupt and invariably demanding, and therefore, without being cruel, he aroused fear and respect for himself, which the most cruel person could not easily achieve. Despite the fact that he was retired and now had no significance in state affairs, every head of the province where the prince's estate was located considered it his duty to appear before him and, just like the architect, the gardener, or Princess Marya, waited in the high waiter's room for the appointed hour of the prince's appearance. And everyone in this waiter's room experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear, when the huge, high door of the office opened and a short figure of an old man appeared in a powdered wig, with small, dry hands and gray drooping eyebrows, which sometimes, when he frowned, obscured the sparkle of his intelligent and, as if young, shining eyes.

On the day of the newlyweds' arrival, in the morning, as usual, Princess Marya entered the waitress's room at the appointed hour for the morning greeting and crossed herself with fear and read an internal prayer. Every day she entered and every day she prayed that this daily meeting would go well.

The powdered old servant sitting in the waiter's room stood up with a quiet movement and whispered: "Come in."

The steady sounds of the machine were heard from behind the door. The princess timidly pulled the door, which opened easily and smoothly, and stopped at the entrance. The prince was working at the machine and, looking back, continued his work.

The huge study was filled with things that were obviously in constant use. A large table on which lay books and plans, tall glass library cabinets with keys in the doors, a marble table for writing in a standing position, on which lay an open notebook, a lathe with tools laid out and shavings scattered around - everything showed constant, varied and orderly activity. From the movements of his small foot, shod in a Tatar boot embroidered with silver, from the firm pressure of his sinewy, thin hand, one could see in the prince the still stubborn and long-suffering strength of fresh old age. Having made several circles, he took his foot off the pedal of the lathe, wiped the chisel, threw it into a leather pocket attached to the lathe, and, going up to the table, called his daughter. He never blessed his children and only, turning his stubbly, not yet shaved cheek to her, said, looking at her sternly and at the same time attentively and tenderly: “Are you healthy?.. Well, then sit down!” (He spoke, as always, briefly and abruptly, opening a geometry notebook written in his own hand and moving his chair with his foot.)

- For tomorrow! - he said, quickly finding a page and marking from paragraph to paragraph with a hard fingernail. The princess bent over the table over her notebook. - Wait, a letter for you, - the old man suddenly said, taking an envelope addressed in a woman's hand from a pocket attached to the table and throwing it on the table.

The princess's face turned red at the sight of the letter. She quickly took it and bent down to it.

“From Eloise?” asked the prince, with a cold smile showing his still strong, but sparse and yellowish teeth.

“Yes, from Julie Akhrosimova,” said the princess, looking timidly and smiling timidly.

“I’ll skip two more letters, but I’ll read the third,” the prince said sternly. “I’m afraid you’re writing a lot of nonsense. I’ll read the third.”

“At least read this, father,” answered the princess, blushing even more and handing him the letter.

“Third, I said, third,” the prince shouted briefly, pushing the letter away, and, leaning his elbows on the table, pulled out a notebook with geometry drawings.

“Well, madam,” the old man began, bending close to his daughter and over his notebook and placing one hand on the back of the chair on which the princess was sitting, so that the princess felt herself surrounded on all sides by that tobacco and old man’s acrid smell of her father, which she had known for so long.

- Well, madam, these triangles are similar; you see, angle abc...

The princess looked with fear at her father's shining eyes close to her; red spots shimmered over her face, and it was evident that she did not understand anything and was so afraid that fear would prevent her from understanding all her father's further explanations, no matter how clear they were. Whether the teacher was to blame or the pupil, the same thing was repeated every day: the princess's eyes were blurred, she saw nothing, heard nothing, she only felt the dry face of her stern father next to her, felt his breath and smell, and only thought about how she could quickly leave the study and understand the problem in her own open space. The old man was losing his temper: he would noisily push back and forth the chair on which he himself was sitting, making an effort not to get excited, and almost every time he would get excited, swear, and sometimes throw his notebook.

The princess gave the wrong answer.

- Well, how could you not be a fool! - shouted the prince, pushing the notebook away and quickly turning away; but immediately he stood up, walked around, touched the princess's hair with his hands and sat down again. He moved closer and continued his explanation in an intensely calm voice.

“You can’t, princess, you can’t,” he said, when the princess, having picked up and closed the notebook with the homework, was already preparing to leave. “Mathematics is a great thing, my lady. And I don’t want you to be like our stupid ladies. You’ll get used to it and grow fond of it.” He patted her cheek with his hand. “The nonsense will fly out of your head.” She wanted to leave, but he stopped her with a gesture and took a new, uncut book from the high table.

- Here's another Key of the Sacrament that your Eloise sends you. Religious. And I don't interfere with anyone's faith. I looked through it. Take it. Well, go, go!

He patted her on the shoulder and locked the door behind her himself.




XXXIII


Princess Mary returned to her room with a sad, frightened expression that rarely left her and made her plain, sickly face even plainer, sat down at her desk, covered with miniature portraits and piled high with exercise books and notebooks. The princess was as disorderly as her father was orderly. She put down her geometry notebook and impatiently opened the letter. When, without yet reading, but only as if weighing the coming pleasure, she turned over the leaves of the letter, her face changed; she apparently calmed down, sat down in her favorite armchair in the corner of the room, near the huge dressing table, and began to read. The letter was from the princess's closest friend since childhood; this friend was the same Julie Akhrosimova who had been at the Rostovs' name day. Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova was a neighbor on the prince's estate and spent two summer months in the country. The prince respected Marya Dmitrievna, although he teased her. Marya Dmitrievna addressed only Prince Nikolai as "you" and held him up as an example to all modern people.

Julie wrote:

"My dear and precious friend, what a terrible and horrible thing separation is! No matter how much I tell myself that half of my existence and my happiness is in you, that, despite the distance that separates us, our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against fate, and, despite the pleasures and distractions that surround me, I cannot suppress a certain hidden sadness that I have felt in the depths of my heart since our separation. Why are we not together, as last summer, in our large study, on the blue sofa, on the sofa of "confessions"? Why can't I, as three months ago, draw new moral strength from your gaze, meek, calm and penetrating, which I loved so much and which I see before me at the moment when I am writing to you?"

Having read up to this point, Princess Marya sighed and looked back at the dressing table, which stood to her right. The mirror reflected an ugly, weak body and a thin face. The eyes, always sad, now looked at themselves in the mirror with particular hopelessness. “She flatters me,” thought the princess, turned away and went on reading. Julie, however, was not flattering her friend: indeed, the princess’s eyes, large, deep and radiant (as if rays of warm light sometimes came out of them in sheaves), were so beautiful that very often, despite the ugliness of her entire face, these eyes became more attractive than beauty. But the princess had never seen the good expression in her eyes, the expression they took on in those moments when she was not thinking about herself. Like all people, her face took on a strained, unnatural, bad expression as soon as she looked in the mirror. She went on reading:

“All Moscow is talking about nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already abroad, the other is with the guards, which are marching to the frontier. Our dear sovereign is leaving Petersburg and, as is believed, intends to expose his precious existence to the accidents of war. God grant that the Corsican monster, who is disturbing the peace of Europe, may be overthrown by the angel whom the Almighty in his goodness has placed over us as ruler. Not to mention my brothers, this war has deprived me of one of the relations closest to my heart. I am speaking of young Nikolai Rostov, who, with his enthusiasm, could not bear inaction and left the university to enter the army. I confess to you, dear Maria, that in spite of his extreme youth, his departure for the army was a great grief to me. In the young man of whom I spoke to you last summer there is so much nobility, so much true youth, which is so rare in our age among twenty-year-olds. He especially has so much frankness and heart. He is so pure and full of poetry that my relations with him, fleeting as they were, were one of the sweetest joys of my poor heart, which had already suffered so much. I will tell you someday of our farewell and all that was said at parting. It is all still too fresh... Ah! my dear friend, you are happy that you do not know these burning pleasures, these burning sorrows. You are happy because the latter are usually stronger than the former. I know very well that Count Nikolay is too young to become anything for me except a friend. But this sweet friendship, these relations so poetic and so pure were the need of my heart. But enough of that.

The main news that is occupying all of Moscow is the death of old Count Bezukhov and his inheritance. Just imagine, three princesses have received some small amount, Prince Vasily nothing, and Pierre is the heir to everything and, what is more, is recognized as the legitimate son and therefore Count Bezukhov and the owner of the most enormous fortune in Russia. They say that Prince Vasily played a very nasty part in this whole story and that he left for Petersburg very confused. I confess to you that I understand all these affairs of wills very poorly; I only know that ever since the young man, whom we all knew simply by the name of Pierre, became Count Bezukhov and the owner of one of the best fortunes in Russia, I have been amusing myself by observing the change in the tone of mothers who have daughters who are engaged to be married, and of the young ladies themselves, in relation to this gentleman, who, let it be said in parentheses, has always seemed to me very insignificant. Only the mother continues to treat him with her usual harshness. Since for two years now everyone has been amusing themselves by finding suitors for me, whom I mostly do not know, the Moscow marriage chronicle makes me Countess Bezukhova. But you understand that I do not want this at all. By the way, about marriages. Do you know that recently everyone's aunt Anna Mikhailovna entrusted me with the greatest secrecy the plan to arrange your marriage. This is none other than Prince Vasily's son, Anatole, whom they want to arrange by marrying him to a rich and noble girl, and the parents' choice fell on you. I do not know how you will look at this matter, but I considered it my duty to inform you. They say he is very handsome and a great rake. That is all I could find out about him.

But he will chatter. I am finishing my second leaflet, and my mother sent for me to go to the Apraksins' for dinner.

Read the mystical book I am sending you; it has had great success with us. Although it contains things difficult for the weak human mind to understand, it is an excellent book; reading it soothes and elevates the soul. Farewell. My respects to your father and my greetings to Mademoiselle Bourienne. I embrace you with all my heart.

Julie.

P.S. Let me know about your brother and his lovely wife."



The princess thought, smiling thoughtfully, and her face, illuminated by her radiant eyes, was completely transformed, and suddenly, rising, walking heavily, she went to the table. She took out a piece of paper, and her hand quickly began to move over it. Thus she wrote in response:

“My dear and precious friend. Your letter of the 13th gave me great joy. You still love me, my poetic Julie. The separation, of which you say so much evil, has evidently not had its usual effect on you. You complain of separation; what should I say if I dared, I, deprived of all those who are dear to me? Ah, if we had no religion for consolation, life would be very sad. Why do you attribute to me a stern look when you speak of your inclination towards a young man? In this respect I am stern only towards myself. I know myself well enough and understand very well that without becoming ridiculous I cannot experience those feelings of love which seem so sweet to you. I understand these feelings in others, and if I cannot approve of them, having never experienced them, I do not condemn them. It only seems to me that Christian love, love for one's neighbor, love for one's enemies, is worthier, sweeter and better than those feelings that the beautiful eyes of a young man can inspire in a young girl, poetic and loving, like you.

The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter, and my father was very touched by it. He says that he was the penultimate representative of a great century, that now it is his turn, but that he will do everything in his power to ensure that this turn comes as late as possible. God save us from this misfortune.

I cannot share your opinion of Pierre, whom I knew as a child. It seemed to me that he always had a beautiful heart, and this is the quality that I value most in people. As for his inheritance and the part that Prince Vasily played in it, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, the words of our Divine Savior, that it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, these words are terribly true. I pity Prince Vasily and even more Pierre. For one so young to be burdened with such an enormous fortune – how many temptations he will have to go through! If I were asked what I desire more than anything in the world, I would wish to be poorer than the poorest of the beggars.

I thank you a thousand times, my dear friend, for the book which you send me and which makes such a noise among you. However, since you tell me that among many good things in it there are some which the weak human mind cannot comprehend, it seems to me superfluous to occupy myself with incomprehensible reading, which for this very reason could not bring any benefit. I have never been able to understand the passion which some persons have for confusing their thoughts by becoming addicted to mystical books, which only arouse doubts in their minds, irritate their imagination and give them a character of exaggeration, completely contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us read rather the Apostles and the Gospel. Let us not try to penetrate what is mysterious in these books, for how can we, miserable sinners, know the terrible and sacred secrets of Providence, as long as we wear on ourselves that fleshly shell which erects between us and the Eternal an impenetrable veil? Let us rather confine ourselves to the study of the great rules which our Divine Saviour left us for our guidance here on earth, let us try to follow them and try to convince ourselves that the less we give our minds free rein, the more pleasing we will be to God, who rejects all knowledge that does not come from Him, and that the less we delve into what He was pleased to hide from us, the sooner He will give us this revelation by His divine reason.

My father said nothing to me about the bridegroom, but only said that he had received a letter and was waiting for a visit from Prince Vasily; as for the plan of marriage concerning me, I will tell you, my dear and invaluable friend, that marriage, in my opinion, is a divine institution, which must be submitted to. However hard it may be for me, but if the Almighty pleases to impose on me the duties of a wife and mother, I will try to fulfill them as faithfully as I can, without bothering to study my feelings in relation to the one whom He will give me as a husband.

I have received a letter from my brother, who announces his arrival with his wife in Bald Mountains. This joy will be short-lived, since he is leaving us to take part in this war, into which we have been drawn God knows how and why. Not only with you, in the center of affairs and the world, but also here, amidst this field work and this silence, which city dwellers usually imagine in the village, the echoes of the war are heard and make themselves felt heavily. My father talks only about campaigns and marches, which I understand nothing about, and the day before yesterday, while taking my usual walk along the village street, I saw a heart-rending scene. It was a party of recruits, gathered from us and sent to the army. You should have seen the state in which the mothers, wives and children of those who were leaving found themselves, and heard the sobs of both. Just think that humanity has forgotten the laws of its Divine Savior, who taught us love and forgiveness, and that it considers its main virtue to be the art of killing each other.

Farewell, dear and kind friend. May our Divine Savior and His Most Holy Mother keep you under their holy and powerful protection.

Maria".



- Ah, you are sending a letter, Princess, and I have already sent mine. I wrote to my poor mother, - said the ever-smiling Mademoiselle Bourienne in a quick, pleasant voice, lisping on the r and bringing with her into the concentrated, sad and gloomy atmosphere of Princess Marya a completely different, frivolously cheerful and self-satisfied world. - I must warn you, Princess, - she added, lowering her voice, - that the prince had a row with Mikhail Ivanovich, - she said, especially lisping and listening to herself with pleasure, - he is very out of sorts, so sullen. I warn you, you know...

- Oh, no, - answered Princess Marya. - I asked you never to tell me what mood Father is in. I do not allow myself to judge him and I would not wish others to judge either.

The princess glanced at her watch and, noticing that she had already missed five minutes of the time she should have spent playing the clavichord, went into the sitting room with a frightened look. Between 12 and 2 o'clock, according to the established order of the day, the prince rested and the princess played the clavichord.




XXXIV


The grey-haired valet sat dozing and listened to the prince's snoring in the huge study. From the far side of the house, from behind the closed doors, the difficult passages of Dussek's sonata could be heard repeated twenty times.

At that moment a carriage and a britzka drove up to the porch, and Prince Andrey got out of the carriage, politely but coldly, as always, letting his little wife out and letting her go first. Gray-haired Tikhon, in a wig, leaned out of the door of the waiter's room, whispered that the prince was sleeping, and hurriedly closed the door. Tikhon knew that neither the arrival of his son nor any unusual events should disturb the order of the day. Prince Andrey, apparently, knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch, as if to make sure that his father's habits had not changed during the time in which he had not seen him, and, having convinced himself that they had not changed, he turned to his wife:

“He’ll get up in twenty minutes. Let’s go to Princess Marya,” he said.

The little princess had changed during this time. Her waist had become considerably higher, she bent back more and had grown extremely fat, but her eyes and short lip with its moustache and smile rose just as cheerfully and sweetly when she spoke.

“Why, it’s a palace!” she said to her husband, looking around with the expression with which one praises the host of a ball.

- Let's go quickly, quickly.

She looked back and smiled at Tikhon, and at her husband, and at the waiter who was seeing them off.

- Is that Marie playing? Quiet, let's catch her off guard.

Prince Andrey followed her with a polite and sad expression.

“You’ve grown old, Tikhon,” he said as he passed the old man, who was kissing his hand, and wiped it with a cambric handkerchief.

In front of the room in which the harpsichord could be heard, a pretty, fair-haired Frenchwoman rushed out of a side door. Mademoiselle Bourienne seemed mad with delight.

“Oh, what joy for the princess,” she said. “Finally! We must warn her.”

- No, no, please... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne; I already know you from the friendship that my daughter-in-law has for you, - said the princess, kissing the Frenchwoman. - She is not expecting us.

They approached the door of the sofa room, from which the passage, repeated over and over again, was heard. Prince Andrei stopped and winced, as if expecting something unpleasant.

The princess entered. The passage broke off in the middle; a cry was heard, the heavy feet of Princess Marya, and the sounds of kisses and mooing. When Prince Andrey entered, the princess and princess, who had only seen each other briefly during Prince Andrey’s wedding, clasped each other tightly with their arms, and pressed their lips tightly to the places they had hit in the first minute. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them, pressing her hands to her heart and smiling devoutly, evidently as ready to cry as to laugh. Prince Andrey shrugged his shoulders and winced, as music lovers wince when they hear a false note. The two women let go of each other; then again, as if afraid of being late, they grabbed each other by the hands, began to kiss and tear their hands away, and then again began to kiss each other on the face, and completely unexpectedly for Prince Andrei, both began to cry and began to kiss again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. Prince Andrei was obviously embarrassed and ashamed, but for the two women it seemed so natural that they were crying; it seemed that they did not even suppose that this meeting could have happened differently.

- Oh, my dear!.. Oh, Marie, - both women suddenly spoke and laughed. - And I saw in my dream... - So you weren't expecting us?.. Oh, Marie, you've lost so much weight... - And you've gained so much weight...

“I recognized the princess at once,” Mademoiselle Bourienne interjected.

“I had no idea,” exclaimed Princess Marya. “Oh, Andrei, I never saw you.”

Prince Andrei kissed his sister hand in hand and told her that she was the same crybaby as she had always been. Princess Marya turned to her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm and gentle look of her beautiful at that moment, large radiant eyes stopped on the face of Prince Andrei, so that his sister, always ugly, seemed beautiful to him at that moment. But at that very moment she turned again to her sister-in-law and silently began to shake her hand.

The princess talked incessantly. Every now and then her short upper lip with its little moustache would fly down for a moment, touch her rosy lower lip where necessary, and a smile would open again, glittering with teeth and eyes. The princess was telling an incident that had happened to them on Mtsensk Hill, which had threatened danger in her situation, and immediately after that she reported that she had left all her dresses in Petersburg and would walk around here in God knows what, and that Andrei had completely changed, and that Kitty Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Princess Marya who was quite serious, but that we would talk about that later. Princess Marya was still silently looking at her brother’s wife, and in her beautiful eyes there was both love and sadness, as if she pitied this young woman and could not tell her the reason for her regret. It was evident that her own train of thought had now been established, independent of her sister-in-law’s speeches. She, in the middle of her story about the last holiday in St. Petersburg, turned to her brother:

“And you are determined to go to war, Andrei?” she said, sighing.

Lisa sighed too.

“Even tomorrow,” answered the brother.

“He’s leaving me here, and God knows why, when he could have gotten a promotion…”

Princess Marya did not listen to the end and, continuing the thread of her thoughts, turned to her daughter-in-law, pointing with gentle eyes at her belly:

“And soon?” she said.

The princess's face changed. She sighed.

“Two months,” she said.

"And you're not afraid?" asked Princess Marya, kissing her again. Prince Andrei winced at this question. Liza's lip drooped. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's and suddenly began to cry again.

“She needs to rest,” said Prince Andrey. “Isn’t that right, Liza? Take her to your place, and I’ll go to Father. What about him, still the same?”

“The same, the same, I don’t know how it looks to you,” the princess answered joyfully.

- And the same hours, and walks along the alleys? The machine? - asked Prince Andrei with a barely noticeable smile, showing that, despite all his love and respect for his father, he understood his weaknesses.

“The same watch, and the machine, and also mathematics and my geometry lessons,” Princess Marya answered joyfully, as if her geometry lessons were one of the happiest memories of her life.




XXXV


When the twenty minutes required for the old prince to rise had passed, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father. The old man made an exception in his way of life in honor of his son's arrival; he ordered him to be admitted to his half of the house while he was dressing before dinner. The prince walked around in the old-fashioned way, in a caftan and powder. And while Prince Andrei, not with the peevish expression and manners that he assumed in the drawing rooms, but with the animated face that he had when he talked with Pierre, entered his father's room, the old man was sitting in the dressing room, on a wide, morocco-covered armchair, in a powder coat, giving his head to Tikhon's hands.

- Ah! Warrior! Do you want to conquer Bonaparte?

This is how the old man greeted his son. He shook his powdered head as much as the braided hair in Tikhon's hands would allow.

“At least take him seriously, otherwise he’ll soon start counting us as his subjects too… Great,” and he stuck out his cheek.

The old man was in a good mood after his pre-lunch nap. (He used to say that after dinner there was a silver nap, and before dinner a golden nap.) He looked joyfully, from under his thick, overhanging eyebrows, at his son. Prince Andrei came up and kissed his father on the spot he had indicated. He did not respond to his father's favorite topic of conversation - teasing the military men of today, and especially Bonaparte.

“Yes, I have come to you, father, and with my pregnant wife,” said Prince Andrei, watching with animated and respectful eyes the movement of every feature of his father’s face. “How is your health?”

- Only fools and debauchees are unhealthy, brother, but you know me, I’m busy from morning till night, abstinent, and well, healthy.

“Thank God,” said the son, smiling.

- God has nothing to do with it. Well, tell me, - he continued, returning to his favorite hobbyhorse, - how the Germans taught you to fight Bonaparte according to your new science, called strategy.

Prince Andrew smiled.

“Let me come to my senses, Father,” he said with a smile that showed that his father’s weaknesses did not prevent him from respecting and loving him. “After all, I haven’t settled in yet.”

“You’re lying, you’re lying,” the old man shouted, shaking his pigtail to see if it was tightly braided, and grabbing his son by the hand. “The house for your wife is ready. Princess Marya will take her and show her around, and she’ll blab a lot of nonsense. That’s their womanly business. I’m glad to have her. Sit down and tell me. I understand Michelson’s army. Tolstoy too… a one-time landing… What will the Southern Army do? Prussia, neutrality… I know that. Austria, what?” he said, getting up from his chair and walking around the room with Tikhon, who was running around and handing him some clothes. “Sweden, what? How will they cross Pomerania?”

Prince Andrei, seeing the urgency of his father's demand, at first reluctantly, but then becoming more and more animated, and involuntarily, in the middle of the story, switching from Russian to French out of habit, began to outline the operational plan of the proposed campaign. He told how an army of ninety thousand was to threaten Prussia in order to bring it out of neutrality and draw it into the war, how part of these troops were to join the Swedish troops in Stralsund, how two hundred and twenty thousand Austrians in conjunction with one hundred thousand Russians were to act in Italy and on the Rhine, and how fifty thousand Russians and fifty thousand Englishmen would land in Naples, and how, as a result, an army of five hundred thousand was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did not show the slightest interest in the story, as if he were not listening, and, continuing to dress as he walked, unexpectedly interrupted him three times. Once he stopped him and shouted:

- White, white!

This meant that Tikhon was not giving him the waistcoat he wanted. Another time he stopped and asked:

- And will she give birth soon? - And having received the answer that soon, he shook his head reproachfully and said: - Not good! Continue, continue.

The third time, when Prince Andrei finished the description, the old man began to sing in a false and senile voice: "Malbrook is going on a campaign. God knows when he will return." The son only smiled.

"I'm not saying that this is a plan that I approve of," said the son, "I'm just telling you what there is. Napoleon has already made his own plan no worse than this one."

- Well, you haven't told me anything new. - And he thoughtfully muttered to himself in a rapid voice: - "God knows when he'll be back." Go to the dining room.

Prince Andrey left. The father and son said nothing about their affairs.

At the appointed hour, powdered, fresh, shaven, the prince came out into the dining room, where his daughter-in-law, Princess Marya, Burien and the prince's architect were waiting, who by his strange whim was admitted to the table, although by his position this insignificant man could not count on such an honor. The prince, who firmly adhered to the distinctions of status in life and rarely allowed even important provincial officials to the table, suddenly proved to the architect Mikhail Ivanovich, who was blowing his nose in a corner into a checkered handkerchief, that all people are equal, and more than once impressed on his daughter that Mikhail Ivanovich was no worse than you and me. At the table, when he expounded his sometimes strange ideas, he most often turned to the speechless Mikhail Ivanovich.

In the dining room, enormously high, like all the rooms in the house, the household and waiters, standing behind each chair, awaited the prince's exit; the butler, with a napkin on his hand, looked over the table setting, winking at the footmen, and constantly ran his restless gaze from the wall clock to the door from which the prince was supposed to appear. Prince Andrei looked at the enormous, new to him, gold frame with a picture of the genealogical tree of the princes Bolkonsky, hanging opposite an equally enormous frame with a badly made (apparently by the hand of the house painter) picture of the ruling prince in a crown, who was supposed to be descended from Rurik and be the founder of the Bolkonsky family. Prince Andrei looked at this genealogical tree, shaking his head, and chuckled with the look with which one looks at a ridiculously similar portrait.

“How can I recognize him here?” he said to Princess Marya, who approached him.

Princess Marya looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand what he was smiling at. Everything her father had done aroused in her awe that was not subject to discussion.

“Everyone has their own Achilles heel,” Prince Andrei continued. “With his enormous intelligence, to succumb to this pettiness…”

Princess Marya could not understand the boldness of her brother's judgment and was preparing to object to him, when the expected steps were heard from the study: the prince entered quickly, disorderly, cheerfully, as he always walked, as if intentionally presenting with his hasty manners the opposite of the strict order of the house. At the same moment the large clock struck two, and another in the drawing room responded with a thin voice; the prince stopped, from under his drooping thick eyebrows his animated, shining, stern eyes looked around at everyone and stopped on the young princess. The young princess experienced at that time the feeling that courtiers experience at the Tsar's exit, that feeling of fear and respect that this old man aroused in all his confidants. He stroked the princess's head and then patted her on the back of the head with an awkward movement, but one to which she felt obliged to submit.

“I’m glad, I’m glad,” he said, and, looking intently into her eyes again, he quickly walked away and sat down in his place.

- Sit down, sit down! Mikhail Ivanovich, sit down.

He showed his daughter-in-law a place next to him, the waiter pulled out a chair for her. She was cramped because of her pregnancy.

- Go, go! - said the old man, looking at her rounded waist. - You rushed, it’s not good.

He laughed dryly, coldly, unpleasantly, as he always laughed, with his mouth only, and not with his eyes.

“You have to walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible,” he said.

The little princess did not hear or did not want to hear his words. She was silent and seemed embarrassed. The prince asked her about her father, and the princess began to speak and smile. He asked her about mutual acquaintances, the princess became even more animated and began to tell, conveying greetings and town gossip to the prince. As soon as the conversation touched on what had happened, the princess apparently became light and adroit.

“Princess Apraksina, poor thing, lost her husband and cried her eyes out,” she said, becoming more and more animated.

As she became more animated, the prince looked at her more and more sternly, and suddenly, as if having studied her sufficiently and formed a clear idea of ​​her, he turned away from her and turned to Mikhail Ivanovich.




XXXVI


- Well, Mikhail Ivanovich, our Bonaparte is having a hard time. As Prince Andrei (he always called his son in the third person) told me, what forces are gathering against him! And you and I all considered him an empty man.

Mikhail Ivanovich, who absolutely did not know when we had spoken such words about Bonaparte, but who understood that he was needed to enter into a favorite conversation, looked at the young prince in surprise, not knowing what would come of it.

"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to the architect, and the conversation again turned to the war, to Bonaparte and the present-day generals and statesmen. The old prince seemed convinced not only that all the present-day leaders were boys who did not understand even the ABCs of military and state affairs, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant Frenchman who had succeeded only because there were no Potemkins and Suvorovs to oppose him; but he was even convinced that there had been no political difficulties in Europe, no war, but some kind of puppet comedy in which the present-day people were playing, pretending to do business. Prince Andrei cheerfully endured his father's ridicule of the new people and with visible joy invited his father to talk and listened to him.

“Everything that was before seems good,” he said, “but didn’t Suvorov fall into the trap that Moreau set for him and not know how to get out of it?”

- Who told you that? Who told you that? - shouted the prince. - Suvorov! - And he threw away the plate, which Tikhon quickly caught. - Suvorov!.. Two, Friedrich and Suvorov... Moreau! Moreau would have been captured if Suvorov's hands were free, and he had the Hofs-Kriegs-Wurst-Schnapps-Rat sitting on his hands. The devil is not happy with him. Go and see these Hofs-Kriegs-Wurst-Rat. Suvorov could not cope with them, so how can Mikhail Kutuzov cope? No, my friend, - he continued, - you and your generals will not be able to cope with Bonaparte, you must take the French, so that their own do not recognize their own, and their own beat their own. "The German Palen was sent to New York, to America, for the Frenchman Moreau," he said, hinting at the invitation that Moreau had made that year to enter Russian service. "Miracles!.. What, were the Potemkins, Suvorovs, Orlovs Germans? No, brother, either you've all gone mad, or I've gone mad. May God grant it to you, and we'll see. Bonaparte has become a great commander for them! Hm!"

“I’m not saying that all the orders were good,” said Prince Andrei, “but I can’t understand how you can judge Bonaparte like that. Laugh as you like, but Bonaparte is the greatest commander!”

- Mikhail Ivanovich! - the old prince shouted to the architect, who, busy with the roast, hoped that they had forgotten about him. - Did I tell you that Bonaparte is a great tactician? Well, that's what he says.

“Of course, your Excellency,” answered the architect.

The prince laughed his cold laugh again.

- Bonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. His soldiers are excellent. That's true.

And the prince began to analyze all the mistakes that, in his opinion, Bonaparte had made in all his wars and even in state affairs. The son did not object, but it was clear that no matter what arguments were presented to him, he was as little capable of changing his opinion as the old prince. Prince Andrei listened, refraining from objections and involuntarily wondering how this old man, sitting alone for so many years without leaving the village, could know and discuss in such detail and with such subtlety all the military and political circumstances of Europe in recent years.

- Do you think that I, an old man, do not understand the real state of affairs? - he concluded. - And for me it is here. I do not sleep at night. Well, where is this great commander of yours, where did he show himself?

“That would be a long time,” the son answered.

- Go to your Bonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here is another admirer of your servile emperor, - he shouted in excellent French.

“You know, Prince, that I am not a Bonapartist.

“God knows when he’ll return…” the prince sang out of tune, laughed even more out of tune and left the table.

The little princess remained silent throughout the argument and the rest of the dinner, looking fearfully now at Princess Marya, now at her father-in-law. When they left the table, she took her sister-in-law by the hand and called her into another room.

“What a clever man your father is,” she said. “Perhaps that is why I am afraid of him.”

“Oh, he is so kind!” said the princess.




XXXVII


Prince Andrei was leaving the following evening. The old prince, not deviating from his usual routine, went to his room after dinner. The little princess was with her sister-in-law. Prince Andrei, dressed in a traveling coat without epaulettes, was packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him. Having personally inspected the carriage and the packing of the suitcases, he ordered them to be packed. Only those things remained in the room that Prince Andrei always took with him: a casket, a large silver cellar, two Turkish pistols and a saber, a gift from his father, brought from near Ochakov. All these traveling accessories were in great order with Prince Andrei: everything was new, clean, in cloth covers, carefully tied with ribbons.

At moments of departure and change of life, people who are capable of thinking over their actions usually fall into a serious mood of thought. At such moments the past is usually examined and plans for the future are made. Prince Andrei's face was very thoughtful and tender. He, with his hands behind his back and turning with a sincere gesture unusual for him, quickly walked around the room from corner to corner; looking ahead, he thoughtfully shook his head. Was he afraid to go to war, or sad to leave his wife - perhaps both. Only, apparently not wishing to be seen in such a position, he stopped when he heard steps in the hallway, hastily freed his hands, stopped at the table, as if tying up the cover of a casket, and assumed his usual calm and impenetrable expression. These were the heavy steps of Princess Marya.

“They told me that you ordered the carriage to be harnessed,” she said, out of breath (she had obviously been running), “but I so wanted to talk to you alone again. God knows how long we’ll be parting for again. Aren’t you angry that I came? You’ve changed a lot, Andryusha,” she added, as if to explain the question.

She smiled as she said the word "Andryusha." Apparently, it was strange for her to think that this stern, handsome man was the same Andryusha, the curly, playful boy, her childhood friend.

“Where is Lisa?” he asked.

"She was so tired that she fell asleep on the sofa in my room. Andrey! What a treasure your wife is," she said, sitting down on the sofa opposite her brother. "She is a perfect child, such a sweet, cheerful child. I love her so much.

Prince Andrei remained silent, but the princess noticed the ironic and contemptuous expression that appeared on his face.

- But we must be indulgent towards small weaknesses; who doesn’t have them, Andrey! Don’t forget that she was brought up and grew up in high society. And then her position now is not rosy. We must understand everyone’s position. Understand everything – forgive everything. Think about how it is for her, poor thing, after the life she is used to, to part with her husband and be left alone in the village and in her position? It is very hard.

Prince Andrei smiled, looking at his sister, as we smile, listening to people whom we think we see right through.

“You live in the village and you don’t find this life terrible,” he said.

- I am a different matter. What can one say about me? I do not wish for another life, and I cannot wish for it, because I do not know any other life. And you think, Andrey, for a young and social woman to be buried in the best years of her life in the village, alone, because papa is always busy, and I... you know me... how poor in interests I am for a woman accustomed to the best society. Mademoiselle Bourienne alone...

“I don’t like your Burien at all,” said Prince Andrei.

- Oh no, she is a very sweet and kind and, most importantly, a pitiful girl. She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I not only don’t need her, but she is shy. You know, I have always been a savage, and now I am even more so. I like to be alone… Father loves her very much. She and Mikhail Ivanovich are two people to whom he is always kind and gentle, because they have both been blessed by him; as Stern says: “We love people not so much for the good they have done us, as for the good we have done them.” Father took her as an orphan on the pavement, and she is very kind. And Father loves her way of reading. In the evenings she reads aloud to him. She reads beautifully.

- Well, to tell the truth, Marya, I think it is sometimes hard for you because of your father’s character? - Prince Andrey suddenly asked.

Princess Marya was first surprised, then frightened by this question.

“Me?.. Me?.. What should I wish for?” she said, apparently from the bottom of her heart.

“He was always tough, but now he’s becoming heavy, I think,” said Prince Andrei, apparently on purpose to puzzle or test his sister by speaking so lightly about her father.

- You are good in every way, Andrey, but you have some kind of pride of thought, - said the princess, as always following her own train of thought more than the course of the conversation, - and this is a great sin. Is it possible to judge a father? And even if it were possible, what other feeling, except deep respect, can a man like our father arouse? And I am so contented and happy with him. I only wish that you all were happy as I am.

The brother shook his head in disbelief.

- One thing that is hard for me - I will tell you the truth, Andrey - is my father's way of thinking in religious matters. I do not understand how a man with such a great mind cannot see what is as clear as day and can be so mistaken? This is my only misfortune. But here too, lately, I have seen a shadow of improvement. Lately, his ridicule is not so caustic, and there is one monk whom he received and spoke with for a long time.

“Well, I’m afraid that you and the monk are wasting your gunpowder, Masha,” Prince Andrei said mockingly but affectionately.

- Ah, my friend! I only pray to God and hope that he will hear me. Andrey! - she said timidly after a minute of silence.

– I have a big favor to ask of you.

- What, darling?

- No, promise me that you will not refuse. It will not cost you any trouble, and there will be nothing unworthy of you in it. Only you will console me. Promise, Andryusha, - she said, putting her hand in her reticule and holding something in it, but not yet showing it, as if what she was holding was the object of the request, and that before receiving a promise to fulfill the request she could not take this something out of the reticule. She timidly looked at her brother with an imploring look.

“Even if it cost me a lot of effort...” Prince Andrei answered, as if guessing what the matter was.

- Think whatever you want. I know you're just like your father. Think whatever you want, but do this for me. Do it, please! My father's father, our grandfather, wore it in all the wars. - She still hadn't taken out what she was holding from her reticule. - So you promise me?

- Of course, what's the matter?

- Andrey, I will bless you with the icon, and you promise me that you will never take it off. Do you promise?

- If it doesn't weigh two poods and doesn't pull your neck. To please you, - said Prince Andrei, but at the same moment, noticing the distressed expression that his sister's face took on at this joke, he repented. - I am very glad, truly, very glad, my friend, - he added.

“Against your will, He will save and have mercy on you and turn you to Himself, because in Him alone is truth and peace,” she said in a voice trembling with emotion, holding in both hands in front of her brother with a solemn gesture an oval antique icon of the Savior with a black face, in a silver robe, on a finely crafted silver chain. She crossed herself, kissed the icon and handed it to Andrei.

- Please, for me...

From her large eyes beams of kind and timid light shone. These eyes illuminated her whole sickly, thin face and made it beautiful. The brother wanted to take the icon, but she stopped him. Andrei understood, crossed himself and kissed the icon. His face was at the same time tender (he was touched), loving, affectionate and mocking.

“Thank you, my friend,” she kissed his clean brownish forehead and sat down on the sofa again.

They were silent.

- So I told you, Andrey, be kind and generous, as you always were. Don't judge Liza harshly, - she began. - She is so sweet, so kind, and her situation is very difficult now.

- It seems to me, Masha, that I never told you anything that I reproached my wife for anything or was dissatisfied with her. Why are you telling me all this?

Princess Marya blushed in spots and fell silent, as if she felt guilty.

- I didn't tell you anything, but you were already told. And that makes me sad.

The red spots appeared even more intensely on Princess Marya's forehead, neck and cheeks. She wanted to say something but could not utter it. Her brother guessed right. The little princess cried after dinner, said that she had a presentiment of an unhappy birth, was afraid of it, and complained about her fate, about her father-in-law and her husband. After crying, she fell asleep. Prince Andrei felt sorry for his sister.

– Know one thing, Masha, I cannot reproach my wife for anything, have never reproached her and will never reproach her, and I cannot reproach myself for anything in my attitude towards her, and this will always be so, no matter what my circumstances. But if you want to know the truth… do you want to know if I am happy? No. Is she happy? No. Why is that? I don’t know…

Saying this, he stood up, went up to his sister, and bending down, kissed her on the forehead. His beautiful eyes shone with an intelligent and kind, unusual gleam, but he was not looking at his sister, but into the darkness of the open door, over her head.

- Let's go to her, we need to say goodbye. Or go alone, wake her up, and I'll be right there. Petrushka! - he shouted to the valet. - Come here, clean up. This is in the seat, this is on the right side.

Princess Marya stood up and headed towards the door. She stopped.

– If you had faith, you would turn to God with a prayer that He would grant you the love that you do not feel, and your prayer would be heard.

- Yes, is that it? - said Prince Andrey. - Go, Masha, I'll be there right now.

On the way to his sister’s room, in the gallery that connected one house with another, Prince Andrei met Mademoiselle Bourienne, smiling sweetly, who for the third time that day had come across him in the secluded passages with an enthusiastic and naive smile.

“Oh, I thought you were in your room,” she said, blushing for some reason and lowering her eyes. Prince Andrei looked at her sternly. “And I love this gallery, it’s so mysterious here.”

Prince Andrey's face suddenly showed anger, as if she and others like her were the cause of some misfortune in his life. He said nothing to her, but looked at her forehead and hair, without looking into her eyes, so contemptuously that the Frenchwoman blushed and left without saying anything.

When he approached his sister's room, the princess had already woken up, and her cheerful voice, hurrying one word after another, was heard from the open door. She spoke as if after a long abstinence she wanted to make up for the lost time.

- No, imagine, old Countess Zubova with false curls, with false teeth, as if mocking the years... Ha-ha-ha.

Prince Andrei had already heard the same phrase about Countess Zubova and the same laughter from his wife five times in front of strangers. He quietly entered the room. The princess, plump, rosy-cheeked, with work in her hands, was sitting in an armchair and talking incessantly, going over her Petersburg memories and even phrases. Prince Andrei came up, stroked her head and asked if she had rested from the journey. She answered and continued the same conversation.

The carriage with six horses stood at the entrance. It was a warm autumn night outside. The coachman could not see the drawbar of the carriage. People were bustling about on the porch with lanterns. The beautiful huge house was ablaze with lights through its large windows. The courtyard crowded in the hall, wanting to say goodbye to the young prince; the entire household stood in the hall: Mikhail Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourrienne, Princess Marya and the princess. Prince Andrei was called into his father's study, who wanted to say goodbye to him face to face. Everyone was waiting for them to come out.

When Prince Andrei entered the study, the old prince, wearing old man's glasses and his white robe, in which he received no one except his son, was sitting at the table and writing. He looked around.

- Are you coming? - and began to write again.

- I came to say goodbye.

“Kiss here,” he showed his cheek, “thank you, thank you.”

- What are you thanking me for?

- For not being late, for not clinging to a woman's skirt. Service first. Thank you, thank you! - And he continued writing, so that splashes flew from the crackling pen. - If you need to say something, say it. I can do these two things together, - he added.

- About my wife... I'm already ashamed that I'm leaving a pregnant woman in your hands...

- What are you lying about? Say what you need to.

– When it’s time for my wife to give birth, in the last days of November, send to Moscow for an obstetrician… So that he’s here.

The old prince stopped and, as if not understanding, stared with stern eyes at his son.

"I know that no one can help if nature does not help," said Prince Andrei, obviously embarrassed. "I agree that out of a million cases one is unfortunate, but that is her and my fantasy. They told her, she saw it in a dream, and she is afraid."

- Hm... hm... - the old prince said to himself, continuing to write. - I'll do it. - He crossed out the signature, suddenly turned quickly to his son and laughed. - Things are bad, huh?

- What's bad, father?

“Wife!” the old prince said briefly and significantly.

“I don’t understand,” said Prince Andrey.

- There's nothing to be done, my friend, - said the prince, - they're all like that, you won't get married. Don't be afraid, I won't tell anyone, and you know it yourself.

He seized his hand with his bony little wrist, shook it, looked straight into his son's face with his quick eyes, which seemed to see right through the man, and again laughed his cold laugh.

The son sighed, confessing with this sigh that his father understood him. The old man, continuing to fold and seal the letters, with his usual speed, seized and threw down the sealing wax, the stamp, and the paper.

- What to do? She's beautiful! I'll do everything. You rest assured, - he said abruptly while typing.

Andrey was silent; he was pleased that his father understood him. The old man stood up and handed the letter to his son.

- Listen, - he said, - don't worry about your wife: what can be done will be done. Now listen: give the letter to Mikhail Illarionovich. I am writing that he should employ you in good places and not keep you as an adjutant for long. It is a nasty position. Tell him that I remember him and love him. And write how he receives you. If he is good, serve him. The son of Nikolai Andreevich Bolkonsky will not serve anyone out of mercy. Well, now come here.

He spoke so quickly that he did not finish half the words, but his son had become accustomed to understanding him. He led his son to the bureau, threw back the lid, pulled out a drawer and took out a notebook covered in his large, long and compressed handwriting.

- I must die before you. Know that here are my notes, to give them to the sovereign after my death. Now here is a pawn ticket and a letter. This is a prize for whoever writes the history of Suvorov's wars. Send it to the academy. Here are my remarks, read them for yourself after me, you will find it useful.

Andrey didn't tell his father that he would probably live for a long time. He knew that there was no need to say that.

“I will do everything, father,” he said.

- Well, now farewell. - He let his son kiss his hand and hugged him. - Remember one thing, Prince Andrey - if they kill you, it will hurt me, an old man... - He suddenly fell silent and suddenly continued in a shrill voice: - And if I find out that you did not behave like the son of Nikolai Bolkonsky, I will be ashamed.

“You don’t have to tell me that, father,” the son said, smiling.

The old man fell silent.

“I also wanted to ask you,” continued Prince Andrei, “if they kill me and if I have a son, do not let him go from you, as I told you yesterday, so that he grows up with you, please.”

“Don’t give it to your wife?” said the old man and laughed joyfully.

They stood silently facing each other. The old man's quick eyes were fixed directly on his son's eyes. Something trembled in the lower part of the old prince's face.

- Say goodbye and go, - he suddenly spoke. - Go! - he shouted in an angry and loud voice, opening the door of the office.

“What is it, what?” asked the princess and princess, seeing Prince Andrei and the figure of an old man in a white robe, without a wig and wearing old man’s glasses, who stuck out for a moment and was shouting in an angry voice.

Prince Andrey sighed deeply and said nothing.

“Well,” he said, turning to his wife, and this “well” sounded like cold mockery, as if he were saying: now do your tricks.

- Andrey, already? - said the little princess, frozen and looking at her husband with fear. He hugged her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.

He carefully moved the shoulder on which she was lying, looked into her face and carefully sat her down on the chair.

“Goodbye, Marie,” he said quietly to his sister, kissed her hand in hand and walked quickly out of the room.

The princess was lying in an armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne was rubbing her temples. Princess Marya, supporting her daughter-in-law, with her beautiful tear-stained eyes, was still looking at the door through which Prince Andrei had come out, and was crossing herself over him.

From the office one could hear, like shots, the often repeated angry sounds of an old man blowing his nose. As soon as Prince Andrei left, the door of the office quickly opened, and the stern figure of an old man in a white robe looked out.

“He left? Well, that’s good,” he said, looking angrily at the insensitive little princess, shaking his head reproachfully and slamming the door.




Part two





I


In October 1805, Russian troops occupied the villages and towns of the Archduchy of Austria, and new regiments arrived from Russia and, burdening the residents with billeting, were located at the Braunau fortress. Kutuzov's headquarters were in Braunau.

On October 8, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just arrived in Braunau, waiting to be reviewed by the commander-in-chief, stood half a mile from the city. Despite the non-Russian terrain and surroundings - orchards, stone walls, tiled roofs, mountains visible in the distance - and the non-Russian people looking at the soldiers with curiosity, the regiment had exactly the same appearance as any Russian regiment preparing for a review somewhere in the middle of Russia. The heavy soldiers in uniforms with their knapsacks held high and their greatcoats thrown over their shoulders, and the light officers in uniforms with swords beating at their legs, looking around at their familiar ranks, at their familiar supply trains behind them, at the even more familiar, familiar figures of the command in front, and even further ahead – the hitching posts of the Uhlan regiment and the battery park, which had been marching with them the entire campaign, felt as at home here as in any district of Russia.

In the evening, on the last march, an order was received that the commander-in-chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Although the words of the order seemed unclear to the regimental commander and the question arose as to how to understand the words of the order: in marching uniform or not, the battalion commanders' council decided to present the regiment in full dress uniform on the grounds that it is always better to bow too much than not enough, and the soldiers, after a thirty-mile march, did not close their eyes, they were repairing and cleaning themselves all night, adjutants and company commanders were calculating, dismissing, and by morning the regiment, instead of the stretched out dirty crowd that it had been the day before on the last march, represented a well-ordered mass of 3,000 people, each of whom knew his place, his job, and on each of whom every button and strap was in its place and sparkled with cleanliness. Not only was the external appearance in order, but if the commander-in-chief had been pleased to look under the uniforms, he would have seen an equally clean shirt on each one, and in each knapsack he would have found the prescribed number of things, "an awl and soap," as the soldiers say. There was only one circumstance about which no one could be at ease. This was footwear. More than half the men had broken boots, and no matter how these defects were mended, they pricked the military eyes accustomed to order. But this defect was not the fault of the regimental commander, since, despite repeated demands, he was not given the goods by the Austrian department, and the regiment had traveled 3,000 miles.

The regimental commander was an elderly, sanguine general with graying eyebrows and sideburns, stocky and broad from chest to back than from one shoulder to the other. He was wearing a brand-new uniform with wrinkled folds and thick gold epaulettes that seemed to lift his plump shoulders upward rather than downwards. The regimental commander had the appearance of a man happily accomplishing one of the most solemn deeds of life. He walked up and down in front of the front and, while walking, trembled at every step, slightly bending his back. It was evident that the regimental commander admired his regiment, was happy with it, and that all his spiritual powers were occupied only with the regiment; but, in spite of this, his trembling gait seemed to say that, in addition to military interests, the interests of social life and the female sex occupied a considerable place in his soul.

- Well, father, Nikolai Mitrich, - he addressed one battalion commander with feigned nonchalance (the battalion commander leaned forward, smiling. It was obvious that they were happy). - Well, father, Nikolai Mitrich, we got into trouble last night (he winked). However, it seems all right (he glanced around the regiment), it seems the regiment is not one of the bad ones. Eh? - He apparently said this ironically.

The battalion commander understood the funny irony and laughed.

- Even on Tsaritsyn Meadow they wouldn't have driven him off the field. What? - the regimental commander said, laughing.

At this moment, two horsemen appeared on the road from the city, along which the mahals were stationed. They were the adjutant and a Cossack riding behind. The regimental commander looked at the adjutant and turned away, hiding the alarm that this appearance had caused him under the guise of indifference. He looked back only when the adjutant was already three steps away from him, and with that special touch of courtesy and at the same time familiarity with which regimental commanders treat officers young in age and rank who are attached to the commanders-in-chief, he prepared to listen to the adjutant.

An adjutant was sent from the general headquarters to confirm to the regimental commander what had been stated unclearly in yesterday's order, namely, that the commander-in-chief wished to see the regiment exactly in the same position in which it had marched, in greatcoats, in covers, and without any preparations.

The day before, a member of the Hofkriegsrat from Vienna had arrived to Kutuzov with proposals and demands to join up with the army of Archduke Ferdinand and Mack as soon as possible, and Kutuzov, who did not consider this union advantageous, among other evidence in favor of his opinion, intended to show the Austrian general the sad situation in which the troops from Russia were arriving.

For this purpose he wanted to ride out to meet the regiment, so that the worse the regiment's situation was, the more pleasant it would be for the commander-in-chief. Although the adjutant did not know these details, he nevertheless conveyed to the regimental commander the commander-in-chief's imperative demand that the men be in greatcoats and covers, otherwise the commander-in-chief would be displeased. Having heard these words, the regimental commander lowered his head, silently shrugged his shoulders and spread his arms in a sanguine gesture.

"We've done a lot of things," he said without raising his head. "I told you, Nikolai Mitrich, I told you that on the march, so in greatcoats," he turned reproachfully to the battalion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, but his words and gestures did not express a shadow of annoyance, but only zeal for his superiors and the fear of displeasing them. He stepped forward decisively. "Gentlemen company commanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed to command. "Sergeant majors!.. Will they be here soon?" he turned to the adjutant who had arrived with an expression of respectful politeness, apparently directed at the person he was talking about.

- In an hour, I think.

– Will we have time to change clothes?

- I don’t know, General...

The regimental commander himself approached the ranks and ordered that they change back into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off to their companies, the sergeants began to bustle about (the greatcoats were not quite in good order), and at the same moment the previously orderly, silent quadrangles began to sway, stretch out, and hum with talk. Soldiers ran up and down from all sides, tossing their knapsacks from behind, pulling them over their heads, taking off their greatcoats and, raising their arms high, pulling them into their sleeves.

Half an hour later everything was back to its previous order, only the quadrangles had turned grey from black. The regimental commander, again with a shaking gait, came forward to the front of the regiment and looked at it from afar.

“What’s this? What’s this!” he shouted, stopping and clutching the lanyard with his hand bent inward. “The commander of the third company to the general! The commander to the general! The third company to the commander!” voices were heard along the ranks, and the adjutant ran to find the lingering officer. When the sounds of diligent voices, distorting, already shouting: “the general to the third company,” reached their destination, the required officer appeared from behind the company, and although the man was already elderly and not in the habit of running, awkwardly catching his toes, he trotted toward the general. The captain’s face expressed the anxiety of a schoolboy who is being ordered to say a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his red nose, obviously from intemperance, and his mouth could not find a position. The regimental commander looked the captain over from head to toe, while he, out of breath, approached, slowing his pace as he approached.

- Are you going to dress people in sarafans soon? What's that? - shouted the regimental commander, sticking out his lower jaw and pointing in the ranks of the third company at a soldier in a greatcoat the color of factory cloth, which differed from the other greatcoats. - Where were you yourself? When the commander-in-chief is expected, you leave your place? Eh?.. I'll teach you how to dress people in kazakins for an inspection!.. Eh?..

The company commander, without taking his eyes off his superior, pressed his two fingers more and more to his cap, as if in this pressing alone he now saw his salvation. The battalion commanders and adjutants stood a little behind and did not know where to look.

- Well, why are you silent? Who is dressed up as a Hungarian there? - the regimental commander joked sternly.

- Your Excellency...

- Well, what about "your excellency"? Your excellency, your excellency! And what? Your excellency, no one knows.

“Your Excellency, this is Dolokhov, demoted...” the captain said quietly, with an expression as if an exception could be made for a demoted man.

- What, was he demoted to field marshal or something, or to soldier? And a soldier should be dressed like everyone else, in uniform.

- Your Excellency, you yourself gave him permission to go on a campaign.

- Permission granted? Permission granted? That's always how you are, young men, - said the regimental commander, cooling down a little. - Permission granted? I say something to you, and you... What? - he said, getting irritated again. - Please dress the people decently.

And the regimental commander, looking back at the adjutant, with his shaking gait, which nevertheless expressed not indifference to the fair sex, headed towards the regiment. It was evident that he himself liked his irritation and that, having walked through the regiment, he wanted to find another pretext for his anger. Having interrupted one officer for an uncleaned sign, another for an irregularity in the row, he approached the third company.

- H-h-h-how are you standing? Where is your leg? Where is your leg? - the regimental commander shouted with an expression of suffering in his voice, still about five people away from the soldier dressed in a bluish overcoat.

This soldier, distinguished from the others by the freshness of his face and especially his neck, slowly straightened his bent leg and looked straight into the general’s face with his bright and insolent gaze.

- Why the blue overcoat? Down with it!.. Sergeant! Change his clothes... the wretch... - he did not have time to finish.

“General, I am obliged to carry out orders, but I am not obliged to endure…” the soldier said hotly and hastily.

- No talking at the front!.. No talking, no talking!..

"I am not obliged to endure insults," Dolokhov said loudly and sonorously, with an expression of unnatural solemnity that unpleasantly struck all who heard. The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general fell silent, angrily pulling down his tight scarf.

“Please change your clothes,” he said, walking away.




II


“He’s coming!” the driver shouted at that moment.

The regimental commander, blushing, ran up to the horse, grabbed the stirrup with trembling hands, threw the body over, straightened up, drew his sword and with a happy, determined face, opened his mouth to one side, prepared to shout. The regiment perked up like a recovering bird and froze.

- At ease! - shouted the regimental commander in a soul-stirring voice, joyful for himself, strict in relation to the regiment and friendly in relation to the approaching chief.

Along the wide, tree-lined, highwayless road, a tall, blue Viennese carriage was riding at a quick trot, in a tandem, its springs rattling slightly, and behind the carriage galloped a retinue and a convoy of Croats. Next to Kutuzov sat an Austrian general in a strange white uniform among the black Russians. The carriage stopped at the regiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian general were quietly talking about something, and Kutuzov smiled slightly, while, stepping heavily, he lowered his foot from the step. It was as if those three thousand people who were holding their breath and looking at him and the regimental commander were not there.

A shout of command rang out, and again the regiment, ringing, shook, and stood at attention. In the dead silence, the weak voice of the commander-in-chief rang out. The regiment roared: "We wish you health, your go-go-go-go-vestment!" And again everything froze. At first, Kutuzov stood in one place while the regiment moved, then Kutuzov, next to the white general on foot, accompanied by his retinue, began to walk along the ranks.

From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander-in-chief, gazing into him, stretching and bracing himself, the way he walked forward behind the generals along the ranks, barely able to restrain his trembling movements, the way he jumped at every word and movement of the commander-in-chief, it was evident that he performed his duties as a subordinate with even greater pleasure than his duties as a superior. The regiment, thanks to the strictness and diligence of the regimental commander, was in excellent condition compared with others that came to Braunau at the same time. There were only 217 sick and retarded men. To the question of the chief of staff about the needs of the regiment, the regimental commander, bending down, dared to report in a whisper and with a deep sigh that the shoes had suffered greatly.

“Well, it’s the same everywhere,” the chief of staff said casually, smiling at the general’s naivety and showing that what seemed a special misfortune to the regimental commander was the common and foreseen fate of all arriving troops. “You’ll recover here, if you can stand it.”

Kutuzov walked along the ranks, occasionally stopping and saying a few kind words to the officers, whom he knew from the Turkish war, and sometimes to the soldiers. Looking at his shoes, he shook his head sadly several times and pointed them out to the Austrian general with such an expression that he did not reproach anyone for this, but could not help but see how bad it was. The regimental commander ran ahead each time, afraid to miss the commander-in-chief's word regarding the regiment. Behind Kutuzov, at such a distance that every weakly spoken word could be heard, walked about twenty people of the retinue. The gentlemen in the retinue, apparently, did not at all feel for Kutuzov that inhuman fear and respect that the regimental commander showed. They talked among themselves and sometimes laughed. Closest of all to the commander-in-chief walked a handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkonsky. Beside him walked a tall cavalry staff officer, extremely fat, with a kind, smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. This huge officer could hardly restrain himself from laughing, excited by the swarthy hussar officer walking beside him. The hussar officer, without smiling, without changing the expression of his fixed eyes, looked with a serious face at the back of the regimental commander and mimicked his every movement. Every time the regimental commander shuddered and bent forward, in exactly the same way, exactly the same way, the hussar officer shuddered and bent forward. The fat adjutant laughed and nudged the others so that they would look at the joker.

“Well, look,” said the fat officer, pushing Prince Andrei.

Kutuzov walked slowly and sluggishly past thousands of eyes that rolled out of their sockets, watching the chief. Having reached the 3rd company, he suddenly stopped. The retinue, not having foreseen this stop, involuntarily moved towards him.

- Ah, Timokhin! - said the commander-in-chief, recognizing the captain with the red nose, who had suffered for his blue overcoat.

It seemed impossible to stretch himself any more than Timokhin did while the regimental commander was reprimanding him. But at the moment the commander-in-chief addressed him, he stretched himself so much that it seemed that if the commander-in-chief had looked at him for a little longer, the captain would not have been able to bear it, and so Kutuzov, apparently understanding his position and wishing, on the contrary, all the best for the captain, quickly turned away. A barely noticeable smile flitted across Kutuzov's plump face.

“Another Izmail comrade,” he said. “A brave officer. Are you pleased with him?” Kutuzov asked the regimental commander.

And the regimental commander, reflected, as if in a mirror, invisibly to himself, in the cornet, shuddered, came forward and answered:

- Very pleased, Your Excellency.

“He had a weakness,” said Kutuzov, smiling and moving away from him. “He drank.”

The regimental commander was afraid that he might be to blame for this and said nothing. Kutuzov began to tell something to the Austrian general in French. At that moment the cornet noticed the captain's face with a red nose and a tucked-up belly and imitated his face and pose so closely that the fat officer could not help laughing. Kutuzov turned around. It was evident that the cornet could control his face as he wished; at the moment when Kutuzov turned around, the cornet managed to make a grimace and then assume the most serious, respectful and innocent expression. But there was something ingratiatingly ignoble in his bird-like face and fidgety figure with raised shoulders and long thin legs. Prince Andrei winced and turned away from him.

The third company was the last, and Kutuzov thought, apparently remembering something. Prince Andrei stepped out from his retinue and quietly said in French:

- You ordered me to remind you about the demoted Dolokhov in this regiment.

“Where is Dolokhov here?” said Kutuzov.

Dolokhov, already dressed in a soldier's gray overcoat, did not wait to be called. A handsome, slender figure of a blond soldier with clear blue eyes stepped out from the front. He was beating out the step with such perfection that his skill was striking and unpleasantly striking precisely because of its excessive clarity. He approached the commander-in-chief and stood at guard.

- A claim? - Kutuzov asked, frowning slightly. Dolokhov did not answer. He was playing with his position, not feeling the slightest embarrassment, and with obvious joy he noticed how the regimental commander shuddered and turned pale at the question "claim".

“This is Dolokhov,” said Prince Andrey.

- Ah! - said Kutuzov. - I hope that this lesson will correct you, serve well. The Tsar is merciful. And I will not forget you, if you deserve it.

The blue, open eyes looked at the commander-in-chief as boldly as they had at the regimental commander, as if with their expression they were tearing apart the veil of conventionality that separated the commander-in-chief so far from the soldier.

“I ask one thing, Your Excellency,” he said in his sonorous, firm, unhurried voice and with an expression of dry, pompous delight. “I ask that you give me the opportunity to make amends for my guilt and prove my devotion to the Emperor and Russia.”

Dolokhov gave this theatrical speech animatedly (he flushed as he said it). But Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes flashed across his face as when he turned away from Captain Timokhin. He turned away here too and winced, as if he wanted to express by this that everything Dolokhov had told him, and everything he could tell him, he had known for a long, long time, that all this had become boring to him and that all this was not at all what was needed. He turned away and headed for the carriage.




III


The regiment disassembled into companies and moved to designated quarters not far from Braunau, where it hoped to put on shoes, clothes, and rest after the difficult marches.

- Don't lay claim to me, Prokhor Ignatych, - said the regimental commander, riding around the 3rd company moving towards the place and approaching Captain Timokhin, who was walking in front of it. The face of the regimental commander after the happy departure of the review expressed uncontrollable joy. - The service of the Tsar... it is impossible... another time at the front you will be cut short... (he grabbed Timokhin's hand with joyful excitement). I will be the first to apologize, you know me... well... I hope... I am very grateful. - And he again extended his hand to the company commander.

“Have mercy, General, but do I dare?” the captain replied, his nose turning red, smiling and revealing with his smile the absence of two front teeth, knocked out by a rifle butt near Izmail.

- Yes, tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him, so he can rest easy. And tell me, please, I've been meaning to ask, how is he behaving? And that's all...

“He’s very efficient in his job, Your Excellency… well, his character…” Timokhin said.

- What about character? - asked the regimental commander.

- He finds himself, Your Excellency, during the day, - the captain said, - both clever and learned, and kind. As soldiers love everything, Your Excellency. And he is a beast. In Poland he killed a Jew, you know...

- Well, well, - said the regimental commander, - one must still feel sorry for the young man in misfortune. After all, he has big connections... connections... So you, well...

“I’m listening, your Excellency,” said Timokhin, smiling, making it clear that he understood his boss’s wishes.

- Well, yes, well, yes.

The regimental commander found Dolokhov in the ranks and reined in his horse.

“Before the first matter, epaulettes,” he said to Dolokhov.

Dolokhov looked back, said nothing, and did not change the expression on his mockingly smiling mouth.

“Well, that’s good,” the regimental commander continued. “A glass of vodka from me to the men,” he added loudly so that the soldiers could hear. “Thank you all! Glory to God!” And he, having overtaken the company, rode up to another.

“Well, he’s really a good man, you can serve with him,” Timokhin said to the subaltern officer walking next to him.

- In a word, a red... (the regimental commander was nicknamed the red king). What, they didn't talk about additional pay? - asked the subaltern officer.

- No.

- Badly.

The regimental commander's happy mood passed on to Timokhin. After talking with the subaltern officer, he approached Dolokhov.

“Well, father,” he said to Dolokhov, “since we talked with the commander-in-chief, our general has now become kind to you.”

“Our general is a pig,” said Dolokhov.

- But it’s not right to say that.

- Well then, if that's the case.

- It’s no good, you’re offending us with this.

“I don’t want to offend you, because you are a good person, and he…”

“Well, well, that’s no good,” Timokhin interrupted again seriously.

- Well, I won't.

The happy mood of the command after the inspection passed on to the soldiers. The company marched cheerfully. Soldiers' voices were talking from all sides.

- What did they say about Kutuzov being one-eyed and having one eye?

- Of course not! Totally crooked.

- No... brother, you have better eyes, and boots and ankle boots, I looked at everything.

- When he, my brother, looks at my feet... well, I think...

- And the other Austrian with him was like he was smeared with chalk. White as flour. I wonder how he cleans his ammunition?

- And what about Fedeshov, he said, or what, when the reflection begins, you were standing closer? Everyone said that in Brunov stands Bonaparte himself.

- Buonaparte is standing! Look at the fool lying! What doesn't she know! Now the Prussian is rebelling. The Austrian, it seems, is pacifying him. Once he makes peace, then war will begin with Buonaparte. And then, he says, Buonaparte is standing in Brunov! That's how you can tell he's a fool. You listen more.

- Look, the devils, the quartermasters! The fifth company, look, is already turning into the village, they will cook porridge, and we will not even get there yet.

- Give me a cracker, damn it.

- And did you give me some tobacco yesterday? That's it, brother. Well, here you go, God be with you.

– At least make a stop, otherwise we’ll travel another five miles without eating.

– That’s why it was so nice, how the Germans gave us carriages near Olmütz. You’re going, you know; it’s important!

- And here, my friend, the people have gone completely wild. There, everyone was Polish, everyone was of the Russian crown, but now, brother, they are all German.

"Songwriters forward!" the captain's cry was heard.

And about twenty people ran out from different ranks in front of the company. The drummer-singer turned to face the singers and, waving his hand, began a drawn-out soldier's song, beginning "Was it not dawn, the sun was rising..." and ending with the words "That, brothers, will be our glory with Kamensky's father..." This song had been composed in Turkey and was now being sung in Austria. Only with the change that in place of "Kamensky's father" they inserted the words "Kutuzov's father".

Having torn off these last words in a soldierly manner and waved his arms as if he were throwing something to the ground, the drummer, a lean and handsome soldier of about forty, looked sternly at the soldier-songwriters and closed his eyes. Then, having made sure that all eyes were fixed on him, he, as if carefully, lifted some invisible precious thing above his head with both hands, held it there for a few seconds and suddenly threw it desperately:

- Ah, you entryway, my entryway...

"My new entrance hall..." twenty voices picked up, and the spoon-player, despite the weight of his equipment, quickly jumped forward and walked backwards in front of the company, moving his shoulders and threatening someone with his spoons. The soldiers, waving their arms in time to the song, walked with a wide stride, involuntarily falling into step. The sounds of wheels, the crunching of springs and the clatter of horses could be heard from behind the company. Kutuzov and his retinue were returning to the city. The commander-in-chief gave a sign for the people to continue walking freely, and his face and all the faces of his retinue expressed pleasure at the sounds of the song, at the sight of the dancing soldier and the cheerfully and briskly walking soldiers of the company. In the second row, on the right flank, from which the carriage overtook the companies, a handsome, blue-eyed, stocky, broad soldier involuntarily caught the eye, who walked especially briskly and gracefully in time to the song and cheerfully looked at the faces of those riding with such an expression as if he pitied everyone who was not walking with the company at that time. The hussar cornet with his shoulders raised high fell behind the carriage and rode up to Dolokhov.

Hussar cornet Zherkov had once belonged in Petersburg to that wild society which Dolokhov led. Abroad, Zherkov had met Dolokhov as a soldier, but had not considered it necessary to get to know him. Now he turned to him with the joy of an old friend.

“My dear friend, how are you?” he said to the sounds of the song, matching the pace of his horse with the pace of the company.

“Hello, brother,” Dolokhov answered coldly, “as you can see.”

The lively song gave special significance to the tone of cheeky gaiety with which Zherkov spoke and the deliberate coldness of Dolokhov’s answers.

- Well, how do you get along with your people, with your superiors? - asked Zherkov.

- No problem, good people. How did you get into the headquarters?

- I'm assigned and on duty.

They were silent. "She released the falcon, but from her right sleeve," the song said, involuntarily arousing a cheerful, happy feeling. Their conversation would probably have been different if they had not spoken to the sounds of the song.

“So, is it true that the Austrians were beaten?” asked Dolokhov.

– The devil knows, they say.

“I’m glad,” Dolokhov answered briefly and clearly, as the song demanded.

“Well, come to us in the evening and pawn the pharaoh,” said Zherkov.

- Or do you have a lot of money?

- Come.

- I can't. I made a vow. I won't drink or gamble until I'm released.

- Well, before the first thing...

– We'll see then...

They were silent again.

“Come in if you need anything, everyone at headquarters will help,” said Zherkov.

Dolokhov grinned.

- You better not worry. I won't ask for what I need, I'll take it myself, - and Dolokhov looked angrily into Zherkov's face.

- Well, I just...

- Well, so do I.

- Goodbye.

- Be healthy.

		…And high and far,
		To my native land...

Zherkov touched the horse with his spurs, which, getting excited, kicked its legs three times, not knowing which one to start with, got the hang of it and galloped off, overtaking the company and catching up with the carriage, also in time with the song.




IV


Returning from the inspection, Kutuzov and the Austrian general went into his office and, calling the adjutant, ordered some papers relating to the status of the arriving troops and the letters received so far from Archduke Ferdinand to be handed to him. Prince Andrei Bolkonsky entered the commander-in-chief's office with the required papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrat were sitting in front of the plan laid out on the table.

“Ah…” said Kutuzov, looking back at Bolkonsky, as if with this word he was inviting the adjutant to wait, and he continued the conversation he had begun in French.

“I am only saying one thing, General,” said Kutuzov with a pleasant elegance of expression and intonation that made one listen attentively to every word he spoke unhurriedly. It was evident that Kutuzov himself was listening to himself with pleasure. “I am only saying one thing, General, that if the matter depended on my personal desire, the will of His Majesty, Emperor Franz, would have been fulfilled long ago. I would have joined the Archduke long ago. And believe me, my honor, that for me personally, to hand over the supreme command of the army to a more knowledgeable and skillful general than I, of whom Austria is so abundant, and to lay off all this heavy responsibility, would be a joy for me personally. But circumstances are sometimes stronger than us, General.” And Kutuzov smiled with such an expression as if he were saying: “You have every right not to believe me, and even I do not care at all whether you believe me or not, but you have no reason to tell me this. And that's the whole point."

The Austrian general looked displeased, but he could not help but answer Kutuzov in the same tone.

“On the contrary,” he said in a grumbling and angry tone, so contrary to the flattering meaning of the words he was speaking, “on the contrary, your Excellency’s participation in the common cause is highly valued by His Majesty, but we believe that the current delay deprives the glorious Russian troops and their commanders-in-chief of those laurels that they are accustomed to reap in battle,” he finished, apparently, a prepared phrase.

Kutuzov bowed without changing his smile.

“And I am so convinced and, based on the latest letter with which His Highness Archduke Ferdinand honored me, I assume that the Austrian troops, under the command of such a skilled assistant as General Mack, have now already won a decisive victory and no longer need our help,” said Kutuzov.

The general shuddered and frowned. Although there was no positive news about the defeat of the Austrians, there were too many circumstances that confirmed the general unfavorable rumors, and therefore Kutuzov's assumption about the victory of the Austrians was very similar to mockery. But Kutuzov smiled meekly, still with the same expression that said that he had the right to assume this. Indeed, the last letter he received from Mack's army informed him of the victory and the most advantageous strategic position of the army.

“Give me this letter,” said Kutuzov, turning to Prince Andrei. “Here, if you please, see,” and Kutuzov, with a mocking smile on the corners of his lips, read in German to the Austrian general the following passage from Archduke Ferdinand’s letter:

"We have fully concentrated forces, about 70,000 men, so that we can attack and defeat the enemy in case he crosses the Lech. Since we already hold Ulm, we can retain the advantage of commanding both banks of the Danube, therefore, at any moment, if the enemy does not cross the Lech, we can cross the Danube, attack his line of communication, and then cross the Danube back, and prevent the enemy, if he decides to turn all his force against our loyal allies, from fulfilling his intention. In this way, we will cheerfully await the time when the Imperial Russian army is completely ready, and then together we will easily find an opportunity to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves."

Kutuzov sighed heavily, having finished this period, and looked attentively and affectionately at the member of the Hofkriegsrat.

“But you know, Your Excellency, the wise rule of assuming the worst,” said the Austrian general, apparently wanting to end the jokes and get down to business. He glanced discontentedly at the adjutant.

- Excuse me, General, - Kutuzov interrupted him and also turned to Prince Andrei. - Look here, my dear fellow, take all the reports from our spies from Kozlovsky. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz, here is a letter from His Highness Archduke Ferdinand, here are some more, - he said, handing him several papers. - And from all this, in pure French, compose a memorandum, a note, for the appearance of all the news that we had about the actions of the Austrian army. Well, that's it, and present it to His Excellency.

Prince Andrei bowed his head respectfully as a sign that he had understood from the first words not only what had been said, but also what Kutuzov wished to tell him. He gathered up the papers and, having given a general bow, walked quietly along the carpet and went out into the reception room.

Although Prince Andrei had not yet left Russia three months ago, he had changed a great deal during this time. In his facial expression, in his movements, in his gait, there was almost none of the former pretense, weariness, and laziness; he had the appearance of a man who had no time to think about the impression he was making on others, and was busy with something pleasant and interesting. His face expressed greater satisfaction with himself and those around him; his smile and look were more cheerful and attractive.

Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, received him very kindly, promised not to forget him, distinguished him from other adjutants, took him with him to Vienna and gave him more serious assignments. At Kutuzov's headquarters, among his comrades and colleagues, and in the army in general, Prince Andrei, as well as in Petersburg society, had two completely opposite reputations. Some, the smaller part, recognized Prince Andrei as something special from themselves and from all other people, expected great successes from him, listened to him, admired him and imitated him. And with these people Prince Andrei was simple and pleasant. Others, the majority, did not like Prince Andrei, considered him a pompous, cold and unpleasant person. But with these people Prince Andrei knew how to behave in such a way that they respected and even feared him. He was closest of all to two people: one of them was a Petersburg comrade, the good-natured, fat Prince Nesvitsky. Prince Nesvitsky, enormously rich, carefree and cheerful, fed and watered the entire staff, constantly laughed at everything that seemed funny, and did not understand and did not believe in the possibility of meanness or hatred towards a person. Another was a man without a name, Captain Kozlovsky from the infantry regiment, who had no secular education, even spoke French poorly, but who made his way through work, diligence and intelligence, and was recommended for this campaign and taken on special assignments to the commander-in-chief. Bolkonsky willingly, although patronizingly, became close to him.

Coming out of Kutuzov's office into the reception room, Prince Andrei approached Kozlovsky with his papers, who was on duty and was sitting by the window with a book on fortifications. Several military men in full uniform and with timid faces were patiently waiting on the other side.

“Well, Prince?” asked Kozlovsky.

- I was ordered to write a note explaining why we are not moving forward.

- Why?

Prince Andrey shrugged.

“Perhaps you are right,” he said.

“No news from Macca?” asked Kozlovsky.

- No.

– If it were true that he was broken, then news would have come.

“It’s not clear,” said Prince Andrey.

“I told you, Prince, the Austrians have taken over us, nothing good will happen.”

Prince Andrei smiled and headed for the exit door, but at the same time a tall, obviously visiting Austrian general, with a black kerchief tied around his head and the Order of Maria Theresa around his neck, quickly entered the reception room, slamming the door. Prince Andrei stopped. The tall figure of the Austrian general, his wrinkled, determined face and quick movements were so striking in their importance and anxiety that everyone in the room involuntarily stood up.

- General-in-chief Kutuzov? - the visiting general quickly said with a sharp German accent, looking around in both directions and without stopping approaching the office door.

“The general-in-chief is busy,” said Kozlovsky hastily and gloomily, as he always did when performing his duties, approaching the unknown general and blocking his way from the door. “How should I report?”

The unknown general looked down with disdain at the short Kozlovsky, as if surprised that he might not be known.

“The general-in-chief is busy,” Kozlovsky repeated calmly.

The general's face frowned, his lips twitched and quivered. He took out a notebook, quickly scribbled something with a pencil, tore out a sheet of paper, handed it over, walked quickly to the window, threw his body on a chair and looked around at everyone in the room, as if asking why they were looking at him. The general raised his head, stretched out his neck and turned to Prince Andrey, who was standing nearest to him, as if intending to say something, but immediately turned away and, as if casually beginning to hum to himself, made a strange sound, which, however, immediately died away. The door of the study opened and Kutuzov appeared on the threshold. At the same moment the general, with his head bandaged, as if running away from danger, bent down and with large, quick steps on his thin legs moved right up to Kutuzov's face. His wrinkled, middle-aged face turned pale, and he could not keep his lower lip from trembling nervously, while in a broken, too loud voice he uttered the following words in bad French:

- You see poor Mack.

Kutuzov's broad, wound-marked face, standing in the doorway of the office, remained completely motionless for a few moments. Then, like a wave, a wrinkle ran across his face, his forehead smoothed out; he bowed his head respectfully, closed his eyes, silently let Mack pass by him, and closed the door behind him.

The rumor, already spread earlier, about the defeat of the Austrians and the surrender of the entire army at Ulm, turned out to be true. The staff reported to each other the details of Mack's conversation with the commander-in-chief, which no one could hear. Half an hour later, adjutants were sent out in various directions with orders proving that soon the Russian troops, who had been inactive until now, would have to meet the enemy.

"The half-mad old fanatic Mack wanted to fight the greatest military genius since Caesar!" thought Prince Andrei, returning to his room. "What did I tell Kozlovsky? What did I write to my father?" he thought. "That's what happened." And he involuntarily experienced an exciting, joyful feeling at the thought of the disgrace of presumptuous Austria and the fact that in a week, perhaps, he would have to see and take part in a clash between the Russians and the French, for the first time since Suvorov.

Returning upstairs to his room, which he occupied together with Nesvitsky, Prince Andrei put the papers, which he now no longer needed, on the table and, with his hands behind his back, walked back and forth across the room, smiling at his thoughts. He was afraid of the genius of Bonaparte, who could prove stronger than all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same time he could not allow his hero to be disgraced. The only possible resolution of this contradiction was for him to command the Russian army against Bonaparte himself. But when could this be? In ten years, ten years that seem like an eternity when they make up more than a third of a life lived. “Ah! Do what must be done, let it be what will be,” he said to himself, the motto he had chosen.

He called for a servant, took off his uniform, put on his fur coat and sat down at the table. Despite his camp life and the cramped common room he shared with Nesvitsky, Prince Andrei was, just as he had been in Russia, as scrupulous as a woman, preoccupied with himself and neat. Nesvitsky knew that nothing could anger his roommate more than the disorder of his things, and Bolkonsky's two tables, one for writing, filled, as in Petersburg, with bronze writing utensils, the other with brushes, soap dishes, and a mirror, were always symmetrically arranged and without the slightest speck of dust. Since his departure from Petersburg and, most importantly, since his separation from his wife, Prince Andrei had entered a new era of activity and seemed to be reliving his youth. He read and studied a lot. Camp life gave him a lot of leisure, and the books he had acquired abroad opened up new interests for him. Among these books were mostly philosophical works. Philosophy, in addition to its intrinsic interest, was for him one of those pedestals of pride on which he loved to stand in front of other people. Although he had many different pedestals from which he could look down on people: birth, connections, wealth, philosophy was for him a pedestal from which he could feel himself superior to people like Kutuzov himself, and this was necessary for Prince Andrei’s peace of mind. He picked up the last work of Kant, which lay on his table, cut to half, and began to read. But his thoughts were far away; his favorite dream, the banner of the Arcole Bridge, constantly appeared to him.

“Well, brother, the bottle is on me,” said the huge, fat Nesvitsky, entering the room, accompanied as always by Zherkov. “What’s the deal with Mac?”

“Yes, he spent an unpleasant quarter of an hour upstairs now,” said Prince Andrey.

(There was a bet between them. Prince Andrei claimed that Mack would be defeated. He won.)

"I told you. Mack will get stuck in your teeth," said Zherkov, but his joke was not liked. Prince Andrei looked coldly at him and turned to Nesvitsky.

“What did you hear when they performed?” he said.

“They sent the second division to move,” Zherkov said in his ingratiating manner.

- Ah! - said Prince Andrey, turned away and began to read.

- Well, stop philosophizing, - Nesvitsky shouted, throwing himself on the bed and puffing, - let's talk. How I laughed just now! Can you imagine, as soon as we left, Straukh was walking by. You should have seen what Zherkov did in front of him.

“It’s okay, I was saluting an ally,” Zherkov said, and Nesvitsky laughed so hard that the bed creaked under him.

Strauch, an Austrian general sent from Vienna to supervise the food supplies of the Russian army, for some reason took a liking to Zherkov. He imitated him very similarly, and every time he met him, he drew himself up, pretending that he was afraid of him, and every time he could find an opportunity, he spoke to him in broken German, pretending to be a naive fool, to Nesvitsky's great delight.

- Oh yes! - said Nesvitsky, turning to Prince Andrei, - by the way, about Strauch. An infantry officer has been waiting for you here for a long time.

- What officer?

- Remember, you were sent to conduct an investigation, whether he stole a cow from the Germans or something.

“What does he want?” Prince Andrei said, wincing and turning the ring on his small white hand.

- Such a pitiful thing, he came to ask you. Zherkov, how is he? Well, what did he say?

Zherkov made a face and began to introduce the officer.

- I... not at all... the soldiers... bought the cattle because the owners... The cattle... the owners... the cattle...

Prince Andrei stood up and put on his uniform.

“No, just hush it up somehow,” said Nesvitsky. “By God, he’s so pathetic.”

"I don't want to hush up or let anyone or anything down. I was sent, I said what happened. And I never pity scoundrels and I don't laugh at them," he added, looking at Zherkov.

After talking with the officer, he arrogantly explained to him that he had no personal dealings with him and did not wish to have any.

“You know yourself, your… prince,” said the officer, who was obviously at a loss as to how to treat this adjutant: he was equally afraid of humiliating himself and of not being polite enough, “you know yourself, prince, that during the campaign there were days when the soldiers did not eat, well, how can we forbid… you judge for yourself…”

- If you ask for my personal conviction, - said Prince Andrey, - then I will tell you that, in my opinion, looting is always a serious offense, and in the land of the allies there is no sufficiently severe punishment for it. But, most importantly, you must understand that I can do nothing; my job is to report to the commander-in-chief what I have found. I cannot lie to you. - And, smiling at this strange thought, he bowed to the officer and went back. Returning to his place, he saw General Strauch and a member of the Hofkriegsrat walking along the corridor. Nesvitsky and Zherkov were walking towards them.

There was enough space along the wide corridor for the generals to walk around the two officers, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitsky away with his hand, said in a breathless voice:

- They're coming!.. they're coming!.. move out of the way! please, make way!

The generals passed by with an air of wanting to get rid of the tiresome honors. Zherkov's face suddenly showed a stupid smile of joy, which he seemed unable to restrain.

"Your Excellency," he said in German, stepping forward and addressing the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you." He bowed his head and awkwardly, like children learning to dance, began to scrape first one foot, then the other.

The general, a member of the Hofkriegsrat, looked at him sternly, but, noticing the seriousness of the stupid smile, he could not refuse a moment's attention. He narrowed his eyes, showing that he was listening.

“I have the honor to congratulate you, General Mack has arrived in perfect health, he just got a little bruised here,” he added, beaming and pointing to his head.

The general frowned, turned away and walked on.

“My God, how naive,” he said angrily, walking away a few steps.

Nesvitsky embraced Prince Andrei with laughter and dragged him into his room. Prince Andrei followed Nesvitsky into the room and, ignoring his laughter, went to his desk and threw Zherkov's cap, which was lying on the floor.

- No, what a mug! - Nesvitsky said through laughter. - This is wonderful! Just a little bit of a mess here... ha, ha, ha!

“There’s nothing funny about it,” said Prince Andrey.

- How is it not funny? Just look at that mug...

- Nothing funny. I am not a great friend of the Austrians, but there are decencies that this scoundrel may not know, but which you and I must observe.

“Enough, he’s going to come in now,” Nesvitsky interrupted fearfully.

- I don't care. How well this shows us off in front of our allies, how much tact there is!.. This officer who stole a cow for the company is really no worse than your Zherkov. At least he needed this cow.

- As you wish, brother, it's all very pitiful, but still funny. If only you...

“Nothing funny. Forty thousand people have died, and our allied army has been destroyed, and you can joke about it,” he said, as if he were confirming his opinion with this French phrase. “That is forgivable for an insignificant boy like this gentleman, whom you have made your friend, but not for you, not for you,” Prince Andrei said in Russian, pronouncing the word with a French accent, noticing that Zherkov had entered the room. He waited to see if the cornet would answer. But the cornet did not answer, picked up his cap, winked at Nesvitsky, and went out.

"Come and dine," Nesvitsky shouted. Prince Andrei looked intently at the cornet, and when he disappeared, he sat down at the table.

“I’ve wanted to tell you for a long time,” he said to Nesvitsky, who was now looking at Prince Andrei with a smile in his eyes. It seemed that any entertainment was pleasant for him, and he now listened to the sound of Prince Andrei’s voice and speech with some pleasure.

- I have long wanted to tell you about your passion for being familiar with everyone, and for feeding and giving drink to everyone in the world without distinction. All this is wonderful, and although I live with you, it is not embarrassing for me, because I know how to make these gentlemen feel their place. And I am not speaking for myself, but for you. You can joke with me. We understand each other and know the limits of jokes, but with this Zherkov you cannot be familiar. His only goal is to somehow jump out, get a cross, and have you feed and water him for free; he sees nothing else and is ready to amuse you with anything, without realizing the meaning of his jokes, but you are not allowed to do that.

“Well, he’s a good guy,” Nesvitsky said, defending him, “a good guy.”

– These Zherkovs can be made drunk after dinner and forced to perform comedies, I understand that, but no further.

- Come on, brother, come on, it's awkward... Well, I won't, just shut up! - Nesvitsky shouted, laughing, and jumping up from the sofa, he hugged and kissed Prince Andrei. Prince Andrei smiled like a teacher to a fawning schoolboy.

- My insides turn over when these Zherkovs climb into your intimacy. He wants to rise and cleanse himself in closeness with you, and he will not cleanse himself, but will only dirty you.




V


The Pavlograd Hussar Regiment was stationed two miles from Braunau. The squadron in which cadet Nikolai Rostov served was located in the German village of Salzeneck. The squadron commander, Captain Denisov, known to the entire cavalry division under the name of Vaska Denisov, was assigned the best quarters in the village. Cadet Rostov, ever since he had caught up with the regiment in Poland, had lived with the squadron commander.

On October 8, the very day when everything at headquarters was stirred up by the news of Mack's defeat, life in the squadron headquarters was quietly continuing as before. Denisov, who had lost all night at cards, was still asleep when Rostov, early in the morning, returned home on horseback in riding breeches and a hussar's jacket. Rostov rode up to the porch, gave his horse a push, threw his leg down with a flexible youthful gesture, stood on the stirrup as if he did not want to part with the horse, finally jumped off and, turning his flushed, tanned face with its emerging moustache, called for an orderly.

“Ah, Bondarenko, my dear friend,” he said to the hussar who rushed headlong towards his horse. “Lead me out, my friend,” he said with that brotherly, cheerful tenderness with which good young people treat all when they are happy.

“I’m listening, your Excellency,” the crest answered, shaking his head cheerfully.

- Look, take it out well!

Another hussar also rushed to the horse, but Bondarenko had already thrown the reins of the snaffle. It was clear that the cadet gave well for vodka and that it was profitable to serve him. Rostov stroked the horse's neck, then its croup and stopped on the porch.

"Glorious," he said to himself, smiling and holding his sabre, he ran onto the porch and clicked his heels and spurs, as they do in the mazurka. The German owner, in a quilted jacket and cap, with a pitchfork with which he cleaned out manure, looked out of the cowshed. The German's face suddenly brightened as soon as he saw Rostov. He smiled cheerfully and winked: "Wonderful, good morning!" he repeated, apparently finding pleasure in greeting the young man.

“Already at work,” said Nikolai, still with the same joyful, brotherly smile that never left his animated face. “Hurray, Austrians! Hurray, Russians! Emperor Alexander, hurray!” he addressed the German, repeating the words often spoken by the German owner. The German laughed, went out of the door of the cowshed, pulled off his cap and, waving it over his head, shouted:

- And the whole world hurray!

Rostov himself, just like the German, waved his cap over his head and, laughing, shouted: “And the whole world hurray!” Although there was no reason for any particular joy either for the German, who was cleaning out his cowshed, or for Nikolai, who was riding with the platoon for hay; both these men looked at each other with happy delight and brotherly love, shook their heads as a sign of mutual love and, smiling, parted, the German to the cowshed, and Nikolai to the hut which he occupied with Denisov.

The day before, the officers of this squadron had gathered at the captain of the 4th squadron in another village and spent the night there playing cards. Rostov was there, but left early. Despite all his desire to be a complete hussar and comrade, he could not drink more than a glass of wine without becoming ill, and fell asleep at cards. He had too much money, so that he did not know what to do with it, and did not understand the pleasure of winning. Every time he, on the advice of the officers, put a card, he won money that he did not need, and he noticed how unpleasant it was for the one whose money it was, but he could not help it. Rostov, despite the fact that the squadron commander never made him any remarks about his service, decided to himself that in military service the most important thing is conscientiousness in the performance of duties, and announced to all the officers that he would consider himself a piece of trash if he ever allowed himself to miss his turn on duty or a business trip. Later, duty and non-commissioned officer service, to which no one forced him, became hard for him, but he remembered the careless word he had spoken and did not betray it. According to non-commissioned officer service, having received a summons from the sergeant in the evening, he ordered himself to be awakened before dawn and went with the platoon to get hay. Denisov was still asleep, but he had already managed to talk with the hussars, look at the German woman, the daughter of a school teacher in Salzeneck, get hungry and come to that happy state of mind in which all people are kind, nice and pleasant. He, slightly jingling his soldier's spurs, walked back and forth on the creaky floor, glancing at the sleeping, completely bundled up Denisov. He wanted to talk. Denisov coughed and turned around. He went up to him and tugged at the blanket.

- It's time, Denisov! It's time! - he shouted.

A black, shaggy head with red cheeks and shiny, black eyes quickly jumped out from under the blanket.

"Go!" Denisov shouted, unable to pronounce the words. "What go? Go to hell from this... sausage kingdom! Such a misfortune! Such a misfortune! Once you left, that's how it all started. I was pouting, God, yesterday, like a son of a bitch!.. Hey, tea!

Denisov jumped up with his brown bare legs, covered with black hair like a monkey's, and, wincing as if smiling and showing his short strong teeth, he began to tousle his thick, fluffed-up black hair and moustache with both hands like a forest.

From Denisov’s first words it was clear that he was not happy at heart, and that his body was weak from wine and sleepless nights, and that his methods of cheerfulness were not a need for him, but a habit.

"The devil made me go to that rat (the officer's nickname)," Denisov said, rubbing his forehead and face with both hands. "Can you imagine, yesterday, when you left, you didn't give me a single card, not a single one, not a single card," Denisov said, raising his voice to a shout and turning purple with excitement.

Denisov was one of those people who regularly let blood twice a year and were called hot-blooded.

“Well, that’s enough, it’s a thing of the past,” said Rostov, noticing that Denisov was beginning to get excited at the mere recollection of his misfortune. “Let’s have some tea instead.”

It was obvious that Rostov had not yet gotten used to his situation and it was pleasant for him to say "you" to such an old man. But Denisov was already getting going, his eyes were bloodshot, he took the lit pipe handed to him, clenched it in his fist, scattering the fire, and beat it on the floor, continuing to shout.

- No, this is a damn misfortune that has befallen me - the sample gives, the password is broken, the sample gives, the password is broken.

He scattered the fire, broke the pipe, threw it down and swung at the orderly. But a minute later, when Rostov turned to him, the fever had already passed.

- And I had a great ride. We passed by that park where the teacher's daughter was, remember?.. - Rostov said, blushing and smiling.

“That’s young blood,” Denisov said quietly, grabbing the cadet’s hand and shaking it. “The young man is blushing, it’s even disgusting…”

- I saw it again...

- Well, brother, it looks like I'll take up the fair sex too - no money, enough playing around. Nikita, give me your purse, my friend, - he said to the orderly, whom he almost beat up. - That's it. What a blockhead, damn it! Where are you rummaging? Under the pillow. Well, thank you, my dear fellow, - he said, taking the purse and pouring out several gold coins on the table. - Squadron, forage, everything is here, - he said. - There must be forty-five forage coins alone. No, what's the point of counting! You won't get up.

He pushed the gold ones aside.

“Well, take it from me,” said Rostov.

“If they don’t bring the salary on Sunday, that’s bad!” Denisov said, not answering Rostov.

"Take it from me," Rostov said, blushing, as always happens with very young people when it comes to money. The thought that Denisov already owed him, and the thought that Denisov was insulting him by not accepting his offer, flashed through his mind.

Denisov's face fell and became sad.

- That's it! Take the Bedouin from me, - he said seriously, after thinking for a while. - I myself gave one and a half thousand for him in Russia, I'll give him to you for the same price. Nothing of value except the sabre. Take it! Shake on it...

“I won’t take it for anything. The best horse in the regiment,” said Rostov, flaring up again.

Bedouin was a really fine horse, and Rostov would have liked to have her, but he was ashamed in front of Denisov. He felt as if he was guilty for having money. Denisov fell silent and began to rumple his hair thoughtfully again.

“Hey, who’s there?” he turned to the door, hearing the stopped steps of thick boots with the clanking of spurs, and a respectful cough.

- Sergeant! - said Nikita. Denisov winced even more.

“That’s bad,” he said. “Rostov, my dear fellow, count how much is left and throw the purse under the pillow,” he said, going out to the sergeant.

Rostov, already imagining himself a cornet on the purchased Bedouin in the squadron’s castle, began to count the money, mechanically putting aside and aligning old and new gold coins in piles (there were seven old ones, and sixteen new ones).

- Ah! Telyanin! Great! They gave me a beating yesterday, - Denisov's sad voice was heard in the other room.

“Who? Bykov, the rat?.. I knew,” said another thin voice, and immediately after that Lieutenant Telyanin, a dapper little officer of the same squadron, entered the room.

Rostov threw the purse under the pillow and shook the little damp hand extended to him. Telyanin had been transferred from the guards for some reason before the campaign. He was not liked in the squadron for his stiffness. Rostov bought his horse from him.

“Well, young cavalryman, how is my Grachik serving you?” he asked. The lieutenant never looked into the eyes of the person he was talking to; his eyes constantly darted from one object to another. “I saw you ride by today…”

“Nothing, he’s a good horse,” Rostov answered in the serious tone of an experienced cavalryman, despite the fact that the horse he had bought for seven hundred rubles had ruined legs and wasn’t worth half that price. “He started leaning on his left front leg…” he added.

- Cracked hoof? It's nothing. I'll teach you, show you which rivet to put in.

Telyanin's eyes did not calm down, despite the fact that his entire small figure assumed a lazy, careless pose and the tone of his speech was slightly mockingly patronizing.

- Would you like some tea? And please show me how this rivet works, - said Rostov.

- I'll show you, I'll show you, it's not a secret. And you'll thank me for the horse.

“Then I’ll order the horse to be brought,” and Rostov went out to bring it.

In the entryway, Denisov, wearing an arkhaluk, with a pipe, hunched over on the threshold, sat in front of the sergeant, who was reporting something.

Seeing Rostov, Denisov winced and, pointing over his shoulder with his thumb into the room into which Telyanin had passed, winced and shook himself with disgust.

“Oh, I don’t like the young man,” he said, not embarrassed by the sergeant’s presence.

Rostov shrugged his shoulders, as if to say: “Me too, but what can I do?” and, having given his orders, returned to Telyanin.

Telyanin sat in the same lazy pose in which Rostov had left him, rubbing his small white hands.

- What a stop - I haven't seen a single house, a single woman since I left Poland, - said Telyanin, standing up and casually looking around. - Well, did they tell me to bring a horse? - he added.

- He ordered it.

- Let's go ourselves.

- What about tea?

- No, I don't want to. I only came in to ask Denisov about yesterday's order. Did you receive it, Denisov?

- Not yet. Where are you going?

“I want to teach a young man how to shoe a horse,” said Telyanin.

They went out onto the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant showed how to make a rivet and went to his room.

When Rostov returned, there was vodka and ham on the table, and Denisov, dressed, was walking quickly back and forth across the room. He looked gloomily into Rostov's face.

- It's rare that I don't like someone, - said Denisov, - but this Telyanin is as disgusting to me as milk and sugar. He cheated you with his Grachik, that's true. Let's go to the stable. Take Bedouin, he's going to be all over the place now, and two bottles of champagne.

Rostov flared up again like a girl.

- No, please, Denisov... I will never take the horse.

And if you don't take money from me in a comradely manner, you'll offend me. Really, I have some.

Denisov winced, turned away and began to ruffle his hair. He was obviously uncomfortable.

- Well, have it your way!

Rostov wanted to get money.

- Later, later, there is more. Scarecrows, send the sergeant, - Denisov shouted to Nikita, - we need to give him the money.

And he went to the bed to get his wallet from under the pillow.

- Where did you put it?

- Under the bottom pillow.

- I'm under the bottom one and looking.

Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The wallet was gone.

- What a miracle!

"Wait, did you drop it?" Rostov said, picking up the pillows one by one and shaking them out. He threw off and shook out the blanket. The wallet was gone.

- Didn't I forget? No, I thought you were definitely putting treasure under your head, - said Rostov. - I put my wallet here. Where is it? - he turned to the servant.

- I didn't go in. It should be where they put it.

- Not really…

- You're all like that, you throw it somewhere and forget about it. Look in your pockets.

“No, if I hadn’t thought about the treasure,” said Rostov, “but I remember what I put there.”

Nikita rummaged through the entire bed, looked under it, under the table, rummaged through the entire room, the wallet was gone. Denisov, rummaging through his pockets, silently watched Nikita's movements and when Nikita spread his hands in surprise, saying that there was nothing in his pocket, he looked back at Rostov.

- Rostov, you're a schoolboy...

He did not finish. Rostov, with both hands in his pockets, stood with his head down. Feeling Denisov's gaze on him, he raised his eyes and at the same moment lowered them. At that very moment all his blood, which had been locked somewhere below his throat, rushed into his face and eyes. The young man, apparently, could not catch his breath. Denisov quickly turned away, winced and began to ruffle his hair.

- And there was no one in the room, except for the lieutenant and you yourself. Somewhere around here.

- Well, you damn doll, turn around and look, - Denisov suddenly shouted, turning purple and throwing himself at the orderly with a threatening gesture. - Bring your wallet, or I'll beat you up!

Rostov, out of breath and looking around at Denisov, began to button his jacket, buckled his saber and put on his cap.

- Well, you son of a bitch. I'm telling you to have your wallet, - Denisov shouted, senselessly shaking the orderly by the shoulders and pushing him against the wall.

- Denisov, leave him. I'll be right there, - said Rostov, approaching the door and not raising his eyes.

- Rostov! Rostov! - Denisov shouted, so that the veins on his neck and forehead swelled like ropes. - I'm telling you, you're crazy, I won't allow it. - And Denisov grabbed Rostov's hand. - The purse is here, I'll skin all the orderlies, and it will be here.

“And I know where the wallet is,” Rostov answered in a trembling voice. They looked into each other’s eyes.

"And I tell you, don't do it," Denisov shouted, straining himself and rushing towards the cadet to hold him back, "I tell you, damn this money! It can't be, I won't allow it. Well, it's gone, damn it..." But, despite the decisive meaning of the words, the captain's shaggy face now expressed indecision and fear. Rostov pulled his hand away and with such malice as if Denisov were his greatest enemy, he fixed his eyes directly and firmly on him.

"Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a trembling voice. "There was no one else in the room. So, if not that, then..."

He couldn't finish speaking and ran out of the room.

“Oh, to hell with you and everyone,” were the last words Rostov heard.

He came to Telyanin's apartment.

"The master is not at home, he has gone to headquarters," Telyanin's orderly told him. "Or what happened?" the orderly added, surprised at the cadet's upset face.

- No, nothing.

“We missed him by a bit,” said the orderly.

The headquarters was three miles from Salzenek. Rostov, without going home, took a horse and rode to the headquarters.

In the village occupied by the headquarters there was a tavern frequented by officers.

Rostov arrived at the tavern, and at the porch he saw Telyanin’s horse.

In the second room of the tavern, a lieutenant sat with a plate of sausages and a bottle.

“Ah, so you stopped by, young man,” he said, smiling and raising his eyebrows high.

“Yes,” said Rostov, as if it had taken him great effort to pronounce the word, and he sat down at the next table.

Both were silent, there was no one in the room, and only the sounds of a knife on a plate and the lieutenant's chomping could be heard. When Telyanin had finished breakfast, he took a double purse out of his pocket, with small white fingers curved upwards, parted the rings, took out a gold coin and, raising his eyebrows, gave the money to the servant.

“Please, hurry up,” he said.

The gold one was new. Rostov stood up and approached Telyanin.

“Let me see your wallet,” he said in a quiet, barely audible voice.

With darting eyes, but still with raised eyebrows, Telyanin handed over the wallet.

“This is a souvenir of a young lady… yes…” he said and suddenly turned pale. “Look, young man,” he added.

Rostov picked up the purse and looked at it and the money that was in it and at Telyanin. The lieutenant looked around as was his habit and suddenly seemed to become very cheerful.

“If we get to Vienna, I’ll leave everything there, but now there’s nowhere to put it in these lousy little towns,” he said. “Well, come on, young man, I’m going.”

Rostov remained silent.

- What, you're buying a horse from Denisov? He's a fine horse, - Telyanin continued. - Come on. - He stretched out his hand and took hold of the purse. Rostov let go of it. Telyanin took the purse and began to put it into the pocket of his breeches, and his eyebrows rose casually, and his mouth slightly opened, as if he were saying: "Yes, I'm putting my purse in my pocket, and it's very simple, and no one cares about it."

"Well, young man?" he said, sighing, and from under his raised eyebrows he looked into Rostov's eyes. Some kind of light in his eyes, with the speed of an electric spark, ran from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov's eyes and back, back and forth, all in one instant.

"Come here," Rostov said, grabbing Telyanin by the arm. He almost dragged him to the window. "You're a thief!" he whispered in his ear.

- What?.. What?.. How dare you? What?.. - But these words sounded like a pitiful, desperate cry and a plea for forgiveness. As soon as Rostov heard this sound of the voice, a huge stone of doubt fell from his soul. He felt joy, and at the same moment he felt so sorry for the unfortunate man standing before him that tears came to his eyes.

“God knows what people here might think,” Telyanin muttered, grabbing his cap and heading into a small empty room. “Explain what’s wrong with you?”

When they entered this room, Telyanin was pale, grey, short in stature and as if he had lost weight after a serious illness.

"You stole a purse from under Denisov's pillow today," Rostov said slowly. Telyanin wanted to say something. "I know it, and I'll prove it."

- I…

The grey face, having lost all its prettiness, began to tremble with all its muscles, the eyes were not running around as before, but somewhere below, not rising to Rostov’s face, and sobs were heard.

- Count!.. don't ruin... the young man... here's this unfortunate... money, take it... - He threw it on the table. - My father is an old man, my mother!..

Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's gaze, and, without saying a word, left the room. But he stopped at the door and turned back.

“Oh my God,” he said with tears in his eyes, “how could you do this?”

“Count,” Telyanin said touchingly, approaching the cadet.

"Don't touch me," Rostov said, moving away. "If you need it, take this money." He threw him the purse. "Don't touch me, don't touch me!" And Rostov ran out of the tavern, barely hiding his tears.

That same evening, a lively conversation was taking place among the squadron officers at Denisov’s apartment.

"And I tell you, Rostov, that you need to apologize to the regimental commander," said the tall staff captain with graying hair, a huge moustache, and large features of a wrinkled face, addressing the crimson-red, agitated Rostov. Staff captain Kirsten had been demoted to the rank of soldier twice for deeds of honor and had twice been curried into favor. A man who did not believe in God would be less strange in the regiment than a man who did not respect staff captain Kirsten.

"I won't allow myself to be told by anyone that I'm lying!" Rostov cried. "He told me that I was lying, and I told him that he was lying. And so it shall remain. He can assign me to duty every day, and put me under arrest, but no one will force me to apologize, because if he, as a regimental commander, considers himself unworthy of giving me satisfaction, then..."

- Wait a minute, Father, listen to me, - the staff captain interrupted in his bass voice, calmly smoothing his long moustache. - You are telling the regimental commander in front of other officers that an officer stole.

- I can't and don't know how to be a diplomat, it's not my fault that the conversation turned to other officers. That's why I joined the hussars, I thought there was no need for subtleties here, and he tells me that I'm lying... so let him give me satisfaction...

- That's all well and good, no one thinks you're a coward, but that's not the point. Ask Denisov, does it look like anything for a cadet to demand satisfaction from a regimental commander?

Denisov, biting his moustache, listened to the conversation with a gloomy look, apparently not wanting to join in. He shook his head in response to the staff captain's question.

- I told you, - he turned to the staff captain, - judge as you know. I only know that if I had not listened to you and had broken the head of this thief long ago (from the very beginning his spirit was disgusting to me), then nothing would have happened, and this whole story, this disgrace, would not have happened.

- Well, the deed is done, - the staff captain continued. - You tell the regimental commander about this dirty trick in front of the officers. Bogdanych (Bogdanych was the name for the regimental commander) put you in your place, you said some stupid things to him, and you need to apologize.

“No way!” Rostov shouted.

“I didn’t expect that from you,” the staff captain said seriously and sternly. “You don’t want to apologize, and you, father, not only before him, but before the whole regiment, before all of us, you are guilty all around. Well, here’s how: if you had thought about it and consulted about how to handle this matter, but you just went straight out and blew it in front of the officers. What should a regimental commander do now? Should he bring the officer to trial and tarnish the whole regiment? Should he disgrace the whole regiment because of one scoundrel? Is that how you think? But that’s not how we think. And Bogdanych is a good man, he told you that you are not telling the truth. It’s unpleasant, but what can you do, father, you got into trouble yourself. And now, when they want to hush up the matter, you, out of some kind of arrogance, don’t want to apologize, but want to tell everything.” Are you offended that you are on duty, but what do you need to apologize to an old and honest officer? Whatever Bogdanich may be, he is still an honest and brave old colonel, so you are offended, but do you care to tarnish the regiment? - The staff captain's voice began to tremble. - You, my dear fellow, have been in the regiment for less than a year, today you are here, tomorrow you will be transferred somewhere to be an adjutant, you don't care what they will say: "There are thieves among the Pavlograd officers!" But we care. Is that so, Denisov? We care?

“Yes, brother, I would give my hand to be cut off so that this would not happen,” said Denisov, slamming his fist on the table.

- You value your arrogance, you don't want to apologize, - the staff captain continued, - but for us old men, how we grew up, and God willing, we will die in the regiment, so the honor of the regiment is dear to us, and Bogdanych knows it. Oh, how dear, father! And this is not good, not good. You can be offended or not, but I will always tell the truth. It is not good.

And the staff captain stood up and turned away from Rostov.

- It's true, damn it! - Denisov shouted, starting to get excited and looking at Rostov. - Well, Rostov! Well, Rostov! Well, to hell with false shame, well!

Rostov, blushing and turning pale, looked first at one officer, then at the other.

- No, gentlemen, no... don't think... I understand very well, you are wrong to think that about me... I... for me... for the honor of the regiment... but what? I will show this in practice, and for me the honor of the flag... well, all the same, it's true, I'm guilty!.. - Tears stood in his eyes. - I'm guilty, guilty all around!.. Well, what else do you want?..

“That’s it, Count,” the staff captain shouted, turning around and hitting him on the shoulder with his big hand.

“I’m telling you,” Denisov shouted, “he’s a damn fine fellow.”

“That’s better, Count,” repeated the staff captain, as if beginning to honor him with a title for his confession. “Go and apologize, Your Excellency, yes sir.”

- Gentlemen, I will do everything, no one will hear a word from me, - Rostov said in a pleading voice, - but I cannot apologize, I swear I cannot, as you wish! How will I apologize, like a little child, ask for forgiveness?

Denisov laughed.

- It's worse for you. Bogdanych is vindictive, you'll pay for your stubbornness.

- By God, it's not stubbornness! I can't describe to you what a feeling it is, I can't...

“Well, it’s your will,” said the staff captain. “So, where did that scoundrel go?” he asked Denisov.

- He said he was sick, and the order was to expel him tomorrow. Oh, if I ever came across him, - Denisov said, - I'd squash him like a fly.

“It’s an illness, there’s no other way to explain it,” said the staff captain.

“Whether it’s an illness or not, I’d still shoot him with pleasure,” Denisov shouted bloodthirstily.

Zherkov entered the room.

“How are you?” the officers suddenly turned to the man who had entered.

- The campaign, gentlemen, Mack surrendered with his army and everything.

- You're lying!

- I saw it myself.

- What? Did you see Makka alive? With arms, with legs?

- Hiking! Hiking! Give him a bottle for such news. How did you get here?

- They sent me back to the regiment, for the devil, for Mack. The Austrian general complained. I congratulated him on Mack's arrival.

- What, Rostov, are you really from the bathhouse?

- Here, brother, we have had such a mess for the second day.

The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by Zherkov. The order was to set out the next day.

- It's a hike, gentlemen.

- Well, thank God, we stayed too long.




VI


Kutuzov retreated to Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges on the Inn (in Braunau) and Traun (in Linz) rivers. On October 23, Russian troops crossed the Enns River. Russian supply trains, artillery, and troop columns stretched through the city of Enns in the middle of the day, on this side and on that side of the bridge. The day was warm, autumnal, and rainy. The vast vista that opened up from the heights where the Russian batteries defended the bridge were suddenly covered by a muslin curtain of slanting rain, then suddenly widened, and in the light of the sun objects became visible far away and clearly, as if covered with varnish. The town was visible underfoot with its white houses and red roofs, the cathedral, and the bridge, on both sides of which the masses of Russian troops were pouring, crowding. At the bend of the Danube ships and an island and a castle with a park, surrounded by the waters of the confluence of the Enns with the Danube, were visible; the left rocky and pine-forested bank of the Danube was visible with a mysterious distance of green peaks and blue gorges. The towers of a monastery were visible, protruding from behind a pine forest that seemed untouched, and far ahead, on the mountain, on the other side of the Enns, enemy patrols were visible.

Between the guns, on the heights, stood the commander of the rearguard, a general with an officer of the suite, examining the terrain through a telescope. A little behind, Prince Nesvitsky, sent by the commander-in-chief to the rearguard, sat on the trunk of a gun. The Cossack accompanying Nesvitsky handed him a purse and a flask, and Nesvitsky treated the officers to pies and real doppelkümel. The officers joyfully surrounded him, some on their knees, some sitting cross-legged on the wet grass.

- Yes, this Austrian prince was no fool who built a castle here. A glorious place. Why don't you eat, gentlemen, - said Nesvitsky.

- Thank you very much, Prince, - answered one of the officers, enjoying talking with such an important staff official. - A wonderful place. We passed by the park itself, saw two deer, and what a wonderful house!

"Look, Prince," said another, who really wanted to take another pie, but was ashamed, and who therefore pretended to be looking around the area, "look, our infantry have already gotten there. There, on the meadow, behind the village, three are dragging something. They will break through this palace," he said with obvious approval.

“Both,” said Nesvitsky. “No, but what I would like,” he added, chewing a pie in his beautiful, wet mouth, “is to climb up there.” He pointed to the monastery with its towers, visible on the mountain. He smiled, his eyes narrowed and lit up. “That would be nice, gentlemen!”

The officers laughed.

- I wish I could scare those nuns. They say there are some young Italians. I'd really give five years of my life for that.

“They are bored, Prince,” said the bolder officer, laughing.

Meanwhile, the officer of the suite, standing in front, was pointing something out to the general; the general was looking through a telescope.

- Well, that's how it is, that's how it is, - the general said angrily, lowering the pipe from his eyes and shrugging his shoulders, - that's how it is, they'll start attacking the crossing. And what are they dawdling around for?

On the other side, the enemy and his battery, on which milky-white smoke appeared, were visible to the naked eye. Following the smoke, a distant shot rang out, and it was visible how our troops hurried across the river.

Nesvitsky, out of breath, stood up and, smiling, approached the general.

“Would your Excellency like a snack?” he said.

“This is not good,” said the general, without answering him, “ours are delayed.”

“Shouldn’t we go, Your Excellency?” said Nesvitsky.

“Yes, please go,” said the general, repeating what had already been ordered in detail, “and tell the hussars to be the last to cross and set fire to the bridge, as I ordered, and to also inspect the flammable materials on the bridge.”

“Very good,” answered Nesvitsky.

He called to the Cossack with the horse, ordered him to put away his bag and flask, and easily threw his heavy body onto the saddle.

“I’ll really stop by to see the nuns,” he said to the officers, who were looking at him with a sly smile, and rode down the winding path down the mountain.

- Well, where will it carry you, captain, that's enough, - said the general, turning to the artilleryman. - Have some fun out of boredom.

“Get to the guns!” the officer commanded, and a minute later the gunners ran out from the fires and loaded.

- First! - came the command.

The first number jumped back quickly. The gun rang out with a deafening metallic ringing, and a grenade flew whistling over the heads of all our men under the mountain and, not reaching the enemy at all, showed the place where it fell with smoke and burst.

The faces of the soldiers and officers brightened at this sound; everyone stood up and began to observe the movements of our troops below, which were visible as if on the palm of your hand, and the movements of the approaching enemy in front. At that very moment the sun came out from behind the clouds, and this beautiful sound of a single shot and the gleam of the bright sun merged into one cheerful and joyful impression.




VII


Two enemy cannonballs had already flown over the bridge, and there was a crush on the bridge. In the middle of the bridge, having dismounted from his horse, with his fat body pressed against the railing, stood Prince Nesvitsky. He laughed and looked back at his Cossack, who stood a few steps behind him with two horses by the bridle. Prince Nesvitsky had just wanted to move forward, when again the soldiers and carts pressed against him and again pressed him against the railing, and he had no choice but to smile.

- What a fellow you are, my brother! - said the Cossack to the furshtat soldier with the cart, who was pressing on the infantry crowded right at the wheels and horses, - what a fellow you are! You see, instead of waiting, the general should have passed. - But the furshtat, not paying attention to the general's name, shouted at the soldiers blocking his way. - Hey! Countrywomen! Keep to the left, wait! - But the countrywomen, crowding shoulder to shoulder, clinging with bayonets and without stopping, moved across the bridge in one solid mass. Looking down over the railing, Prince Nesvitsky saw the fast, muddy, low waves of the Ens, which, merging, rippling and bending near the piles of the bridge, overtook one another. Looking at the bridge, he saw the same monotonous, living waves of soldiers, their coats, shakos with covers, knapsacks, bayonets, long guns, and from under the shakos faces with wide cheekbones, sunken cheeks and carefree tired expressions, and moving feet on the sticky mud dragged onto the planks of the bridge. Sometimes, between the monotonous waves of soldiers, like a splash of white foam in the waves of the Ens, an officer in a cloak squeezed through the soldiers with his physiognomy different from the soldiers, sometimes, like a chip winding along the river, a foot hussar, orderly or inhabitant was carried along the bridge by waves of infantry, sometimes, like a log floating down the river, a company or officer's cart, loaded to the top and covered with skins, floated along the bridge, surrounded on all sides.

“Look at them, like a dam has burst,” the Cossack said, stopping hopelessly. “Are there many of you still there?”

- Melion without one! - a cheerful soldier in a torn overcoat said, winking, and disappeared; another, old soldier walked behind him.

- Now when he (he - the enemy) starts scratching himself across the bridge, - the old soldier said gloomily, turning to his comrade, - you'll forget to scratch yourself, - and the soldier passed. Behind him, another soldier rode in a cart.

- Where the hell did you put the wraps? - said the orderly, running after the cart and rummaging in the back. And this one passed by with the cart. Behind this one came cheerful and, apparently, drunk soldiers.

“How he, my dear fellow, will blaze with the butt of his rifle right in his teeth…” one soldier in a highly tucked-up overcoat said joyfully, waving his arm widely.

“That’s it, sweet ham,” answered the other with a laugh.

And they passed by, so that Nesvitsky did not find out who was hit in the teeth and what the ham belonged to.

- What a hurry, he let the cold one in. You'd think they'd kill everyone, - the non-commissioned officer said angrily and reproachfully.

- When that cannonball flew past me, uncle, - said the young soldier, barely holding back his laughter with his huge mouth, - I was dumbfounded. Really, by God, I was so scared, what a disaster! - said this soldier, as if bragging about being scared.

And this one passed; behind him followed a cart unlike any that had passed before. It was a German horse-drawn carriage, loaded with what seemed to be a whole house; behind the horse-drawn carriage, which the German was pulling, was tied a beautiful, motley cow with a huge udder. On the feather beds sat a woman with a baby, an old woman and a young, crimson-cheeked, healthy girl, a German. Apparently, these evicted residents had been allowed through by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers turned to the women, and as the carriage passed, moving step by step, all the soldiers' remarks were directed only at the two women. On all the faces was almost the same smile of indecent thoughts about this woman.

- Look at the sausage, it’s also being cleaned up.

“Sell your mother,” said another soldier, emphasizing the last word, turning to the German, who, with his eyes downcast, was walking angrily and fearfully with wide strides.

- Wow, she cleaned up! That's what the devils are talking about!

– I wish you could stand next to them, Fedotov!

- We saw it, brother!

"Where are you going?" asked the infantry officer, who was eating an apple, also half-smiling and looking at the beautiful girl. The German, closing his eyes, showed that he did not understand.

"If you want, take one for yourself," said the officer, handing the girl an apple. The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitsky, like everyone else on the bridge, kept his eyes on the women until they passed. When they passed, the same soldiers were walking again, talking the same way, and finally they all stopped. As often happens, the horses in the company cart got stuck at the exit of the bridge, and the whole crowd had to wait.

- What are you standing there for? There is no order! - the soldiers said. - Where are you going? Damn it! There is no time to wait. It will be worse if he sets fire to the bridge. Look, they even got the officer, - the crowds that had stopped from different sides said, looking at each other, and all of them pressed forward towards the exit.

Looking back under the bridge at the waters of the Enns, Nesvitsky suddenly heard a sound that was new to him: something large rapidly approaching and something splashing into the water.

- Look at where he's going! - a soldier standing nearby said sternly, looking back at the sound.

"He's encouraging them to pass quickly," said another, restlessly. The crowd began to move again. Nesvitsky realized that it was a cannonball.

- Hey, Cossack, give me the horse! - he said. - Come on, you! Move aside! Move aside! Make way!

He reached the horse with great effort. Without ceasing to shout, he moved forward. The soldiers pressed forward to make way for him, but again they pressed on him so that they crushed his foot, and those nearest were not to blame, because they were pressed even harder.

- Nesvitsky! Nesvitsky! You're a mug! - a hoarse voice was heard from behind at that moment.

Nesvitsky looked back and saw, fifteen steps away, separated from him by a living mass of advancing infantry, red, black, shaggy, with a cap on the back of his head and a cloak jauntily thrown over his shoulder, Vaska Denisov.

“Tell them, the devils, the devils, to make way,” Vaska shouted, apparently in a fit of ardor, flashing and moving his coal-black eyes with inflamed whites and waving his undrawn saber, which he held in his bare little hand, as red as his face.

- Hey! Vasya, - Nesvitsky answered joyfully. - What are you talking about?

“The squadron can’t get through,” shouted Vaska Denisov, angrily showing his white teeth, spurring his beautiful black thoroughbred Bedouin, who, blinking his ears from the bayonets he bumped into, snorted, splashing foam around himself from the mouthpiece, clanking, stamping his hooves on the planks of the bridge and, it seemed, ready to jump over the railing of the bridge if the rider would let him. “What is this? Like rams! Just like rams! Just like... make way!.. Stop there! You, cart, devil! I’ll hack you to pieces with my sabre...” he shouted, actually drawing his sabre and beginning to wave it.

The soldiers, their faces frightened, pressed against each other, and Denisov joined Nesvitsky.

“Why aren’t you drunk today?” Nesvitsky said to Denisov when he rode up to him.

- They won't even give us time to get drunk! - Denisov answered. - They've been dragging the regiment here and there all day. If we're going to fight, let's fight. Otherwise, the devil knows what will happen!

“What a dandy you are today!” said Nesvitsky, looking at his new pelisse and saddle pad.

Denisov smiled, took a handkerchief from his bag that was releasing the scent of perfume, and stuck it under Nesvitsky’s nose.

- No, I'm going to work! I shaved, brushed my teeth and put on perfume.

The stately figure of Nesvitsky, accompanied by a Cossack, and the determination of Denisov, waving his sabre and shouting desperately, had such an effect that they squeezed through to the other side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Nesvitsky found the colonel at the exit to whom he had to convey the order and, having carried out his mission, rode back.

Having cleared the way, Denisov stopped at the entrance to the bridge. Carelessly holding back the stallion that was rushing towards his men and kicking, he looked at the squadron moving towards him. Transparent sounds of hooves were heard on the planks of the bridge, as if several horses were galloping, and the squadron with officers in front, four men in a row, stretched out along the bridge and began to come out on the other side.

The handsome young Peronsky, the best rider of the regiment and a rich man, rode to the castle on a three-thousand-dollar stallion, swooping. The stopped infantry soldiers, crowding in the mud trampled by the bridge, with that special unfriendly feeling of alienation and mockery with which different branches of the military usually meet, looked at the clean, dapper hussars, marching past them in order.

- Smart guys! If only they could go to Podnovinskoye!

- What good are they? They're just there for show! - said another.

"Infantry, don't make dust!" joked the hussar, whose horse, having started playing, splashed mud at the infantryman.

“I would have sent you on two marches with your backpack, the laces would have worn out,” said the infantryman, wiping the dirt from his face with his sleeve, “otherwise you’re not a man, you’re a bird sitting there!”

“I wish they could put you on a horse, Zikin, you’d be so agile,” the corporal joked about the thin soldier, bent over from the weight of his knapsack.

“Take a club between your legs, and you’ll have a horse,” the hussar responded.




VIII


The rest of the infantry hurried across the bridge, crowding together like a funnel at the entrance. Finally, all the wagons had passed, the crush had eased, and the last battalion entered the bridge. Only the hussars of Denisov's squadron remained on the other side of the bridge facing the enemy. The enemy, visible in the distance from the opposite mountain, was not yet visible below the bridge, since from the ravine along which the river flowed, the horizon ended at the opposite elevation no more than half a verst. Ahead was a desert, along which here and there groups of our patrolling Cossacks were moving. Suddenly, troops in blue capots and artillery appeared on the opposite elevation of the road. They were the French. The patrol of Cossacks trotted down the hill. All the officers and men of Denisov's squadron, although they tried to talk about other things and look around, did not stop thinking only about what was there, on the mountain, and they all constantly peered at the spots on the horizon, which they recognized as enemy troops. The weather cleared up again in the afternoon, the sun was setting brightly over the Danube and the dark mountains surrounding it. It was quiet, and from that mountain the sounds of horns and shouts of the enemy occasionally reached. Between the squadron and the enemy there was no one left, except for small patrols. An empty space, about three hundred sazhens, separated them from it. The enemy stopped shooting, and the more clearly was felt that stern, menacing, impregnable and elusive line that separates the two enemy armies.

One step beyond that line, reminiscent of the line separating the living from the dead, and the uncertainty of suffering and death. And what is there? Who is there? There, beyond that field, and the tree, and the roof illuminated by the sun? No one knows, and one wants to know, and one is afraid to cross that line, and one wants to cross it, and one knows that sooner or later one will have to cross it and find out what is there, on the other side of the line, just as one inevitably finds out what is there, on the other side of death. And oneself is strong, healthy, cheerful and irritated, and surrounded by such healthy and irritably animated people. Although one does not think about it, one feels all this, every person who is in sight of the enemy, and this feeling gives a special brilliance and joyful sharpness to the impressions of everything that is happening in those minutes.

On the hillock near the enemy a smoke of a shot appeared, and a cannonball, whistling, flew over the heads of the hussar squadron. The officers, standing together, rode away to their places, the hussars began to carefully straighten their horses. Everything in the squadron fell silent. Everyone looked ahead at the enemy and at the squadron commander, waiting for the command. Another cannonball flew by, a third. Obviously, they were shooting at the hussars; but the cannonball, whistling evenly and quickly, flew over the heads of the hussars and struck somewhere behind. The hussars did not look back, but at each sound of a cannonball flying past, as if on command, the whole squadron with its monotonously varied faces and trimmed moustaches held its breath while the cannonball was flying, and, straining the muscles of its legs in its stretched blue breeches, rose in its stirrups and fell again. The soldiers, without turning their heads, glanced sideways at each other, curiously looking out for their comrade's impression. On each face, from Denisov to the bugler, a common feature of the struggle between irritation and excitement appeared near the lips and chin. The sergeant frowned, looking at the soldiers, as if threatening punishment. Junker Mironov bent down at each cannonball. Rostov, standing on the left flank on his Grachik, which was touched by its feet but still visible, had the happy look of a student called before a large audience for an examination in which he was sure to distinguish himself. He looked around at everyone clearly and brightly, as if asking them to pay attention to how calmly he stood under the cannonballs. But in his face, too, the same feature of something new and stern, against his will, appeared near his mouth.

- Who's bowing there? Junker Mironov! That's not right, look at me! - shouted Denisov, who couldn't stand still and was spinning around on his horse in front of the squadron.

Vaska Denisov's snub-nosed, black-haired face and his whole small, stocky figure with his sinewy, short-fingered, hairy hand, in which he held the hilt of his drawn sabre, were exactly the same as always, especially in the evening, after he had drunk two bottles. He was only redder than usual, and, throwing his shaggy head upwards, like birds when they sing, mercilessly pressing his spurs into the sides of the good Bedouin with his small feet, he, as if falling backwards, galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in a hoarse voice for the pistols to be examined. As he passed, he glanced at the handsome castle officer Peronsky and quickly turned away.

Peronsky, in his hussar's half-dress, on his thousandth horse, was very handsome. But his handsome face was pale as snow. His thoroughbred stallion, sensing the terrible sounds above his head, went into that zealous rage of a thoroughbred and trained horse that children and hussars love so much. Now he snorted, jingling the chain and rings of his bit, and struck the ground with his muscular, thin leg, sometimes not reaching it, waving it in the air, now, turning his dry head to the right and left, as far as the bit would let, he squinted with a bulging, bloodshot black eye at the rider. Denisov, angrily turning away from him, headed toward Kirsten. The staff captain on a broad and sedate mare rode at a walking pace toward Denisov. The staff captain, with his long moustache, was as serious as always, only his eyes sparkled more than usual.

- What? - he said to Denisov. - It won't come to an attack. You'll see, we'll go back.

- The devil knows what they're doing! - Denisov shouted. - Ah! Rostov! - he shouted to the cadet, noticing him. - Well, you've waited. - And he smiled approvingly, obviously happy for the cadet.

Rostov felt completely happy. At that moment the chief appeared on the bridge. Denisov galloped towards him.

- Your Excellency! Allow me to attack! I will overthrow them!

"What attacks?" the chief said in a bored voice, wincing as if from a pesky fly. "And why are you standing here? See how the flankers are retreating? Lead the squadron back."

The squadron crossed the bridge and came out from under the fire without losing a single man. The second squadron, which was in the chain, followed it, and the last Cossacks cleared that side.




IX


The two squadrons of the Pavlograders, having crossed the bridge, went back up the hill one after the other. The regimental commander, Karl Bogdanovich Schubert, rode up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a walking pace not far from Rostov, paying no attention to him, despite the fact that after the previous clash over Telyanin they were now seeing each other for the first time. Rostov, feeling himself at the front in the power of a man before whom he now considered himself guilty, did not take his eyes off the athletic back, the blond nape and the red neck of the regimental commander. It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanych was only pretending to be inattentive and that his whole purpose now consisted in testing the courage of the cadet, and he straightened up and looked around cheerfully; then it seemed to him that Bogdanych was deliberately riding close in order to show Rostov his courage. Then it seemed to him that his enemy would now deliberately send a squadron into a desperate attack in order to punish him, Nikolai. It was thought that after the attack he would come up to him and generously extend to him, the wounded man, a hand of reconciliation.

The figure of Zherkov, familiar to the people of Pavlograd, with his shoulders raised high, rode up to the regimental commander. Zherkov, after his expulsion from the general staff, did not remain in the regiment, saying that he was not a fool to pull the strap at the front, when he, at the staff, doing nothing, would receive more awards, and he knew how to get a job as an orderly to Prince Bagration. He came to his former superior with an order from the commander of the rearguard.

“Colonel,” he said with his gloomy seriousness, turning to the enemy of Nikolai Rostov and looking around at his comrades, “the order was to stop and set the bridge on fire.”

“Who ordered it?” the colonel asked sullenly.

“I don’t know, Colonel, who ordered it,” the cornet answered naively and seriously, “but the prince ordered me: ‘Go and tell the Colonel that the hussars should return quickly and set fire to the bridge.’”

Following Zherkov, a retinue officer rode up to the hussar colonel with the same order. Following the retinue officer, on a Cossack horse, which could hardly carry him at a gallop, the fat Nesvitsky rode up.

“Of course, Colonel,” he shouted while still riding, “I told you to light the bridge; but now someone has twisted it, everyone is going crazy there, you can’t make anything out.”

The colonel slowly stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitsky:

“You told me about flammable substances,” he said, “but about lighting, you didn’t tell me anything.”

“But how could you, Father,” Nesvitsky said, stopping, taking off his cap and straightening his hair, wet with sweat, with his plump hand, “how could you not have said to set the bridge on fire when the flammable substances were laid.”

- I am not your "father", Mister Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to set the bridge on fire! I know my duty, and it is my habit to strictly follow orders. You said that the bridge would be set on fire, but I cannot know by the Holy Spirit...

“Well, that’s always the case,” Nesvitsky said, waving his hand.

“How are you here?” he asked Zherkov.

- For the same reason. However, you are damp, let me squeeze you out.

“You said, Mr. Staff Officer...” the colonel continued in an offended tone.

“Colonel,” interrupted the officer of the suite, “we must hurry, otherwise the enemy will move the guns to within grapeshot range.”

The colonel silently looked at the retinue officer, at the fat staff officer, at Zherkov and frowned.

“I will light the bridge,” he said in a solemn tone, as if, despite all the troubles caused to him, he was expressing his generosity.

Kicking his long, muscular legs at his horse, as if it were to blame for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second squadron, the same one in which Rostov served under Denisov's command, to return back to the bridge.

"Well, that's it," thought Rostov, "he wants to test me!" His heart sank, and the blood rushed to his face. "Let him see if I'm a coward?" he thought.

Again on all the cheerful faces of the squadron's men appeared that serious feature which had been on them while they were standing under the cannonballs.

Nikolai, without taking his eyes off his enemy, the regimental commander, wishing to find confirmation of his guesses on his face; but the colonel did not glance at Nikolai once, but looked, as always at the front, sternly and solemnly. A command was heard.

- Quickly! Quickly! - several voices said around him. The hussars were dismounting, clinging to the reins with their sabres, rattling their spurs and hurrying, not knowing what they would do. The hussars crossed themselves. Rostov no longer looked at the regimental commander, he had no time. He was afraid, with a sinking heart, afraid that he would fall behind the hussars. His hand was shaking as he handed the horse to the groom, and he felt the blood rushing to his heart with a thump. Denisov, falling back and shouting something, rode past him. Nikolai saw nothing but the hussars running around him, clinging to their spurs and jingling their sabres.

"Stretchers!" someone's voice shouted from behind. Rostov didn't think about what the demand for a stretcher meant; he ran, trying only to be ahead of everyone else, but right at the bridge, without looking under his feet, he fell into the sticky, trampled mud and, tripping, fell on his hands. Others ran around him.

“On both sides, captain,” he heard the voice of the regimental commander, who, having ridden forward, stood on horseback not far from the bridge with a triumphant and cheerful face.

Rostov, wiping his dirty hands on his breeches, looked back at his enemy and wanted to run on, believing that the further he went ahead, the better. But Bogdanych, although he did not look and did not recognize Rostov, shouted at him:

- Who's running in the middle of the bridge? To the right side! Junker, back! - he shouted angrily.

But even here Karl Bogdanovich did not pay attention to him; instead, he turned to Denisov, who, showing off his courage, rode on horseback onto the boards of the bridge.

- Why take risks, captain! You should get off, - said the colonel.

“Eh! He’ll find someone to blame,” answered Vaska Denisov, turning in the saddle.

Meanwhile, Nesvitsky, Zherkov and the officer of the suite stood together, out of range of the shots, and looked now at this, now at that small group of people in yellow shakos, dark green jackets embroidered with cords, and blue breeches, swarming about near the bridge, now at that side, at the blue capots and groups with horses approaching in the distance, which could easily be mistaken for a gun.

"Will they set the bridge on fire or not? Who will be first? Will they run up and set the bridge on fire, or will the French ride up to grapeshot range and kill them?" Each of the large number of troops standing over the bridge, in the bright evening light, involuntarily asked themselves these questions with bated breath, and looked at the bridge and the hussars, and at the other side, at the advancing blue capotes with bayonets and guns.

- Oh! The hussars will get it! - said Nesvitsky. - No further than a grapeshot shot now.

“It was in vain that he led so many people,” said the officer of the suite.

“And in fact,” said Nesvitsky, “it would be all the same if we sent two young men here.”

- Ah, your Excellency, - Zherkov intervened, not taking his eyes off the hussars, but still in his naive manner, from which it was impossible to guess whether what he was saying was serious or not. - Ah, your Excellency! How do you judge! Send two people, and who will give us Vladimir with a bow? And so, even if they beat us up, you can present a squadron, and get a bow yourself. Our Bogdanych knows the rules.

“Well,” said the officer of the suite, “that’s grapeshot.” ​​He pointed to the French guns, which were being removed from their limbers and quickly driven away.

“But he’s lying,” Zherkov continued, “and they’ll expose me, and we were under fire.”

At this time, on the French side, in those groups where the guns were, smoke appeared again, another, a third, almost at the same time, and at the very moment the sound of the first shot reached us, a fourth appeared. Two sounds one after another, and a third.

- Oh-oh! - Nesvitsky gasped, as if from a burning pain, grabbing the officer of the suite by the hand. - Look, one fell, fell, fell.

- Two, I think.

- If I were a king, I would never fight. And why are they taking so long!

The French guns were hastily loading. The infantry moved towards the bridge at a run. Again, but at regular intervals, smoke appeared, and grapeshot began to crackle and pop on the bridge. But this time Nesvitsky could not see what was happening on the bridge. Thick smoke rose from the bridge. The hussars had managed to set the bridge on fire, and the French batteries were firing at them no longer to interfere, but so that the guns were aimed and there was someone to shoot at. The French managed to fire three grapeshot shots before the hussars returned to their horsemen. Two volleys were made incorrectly, and all the grapeshot was carried over, but the last shot hit the middle of a group of hussars and knocked down three.

Nikolai Rostov, preoccupied with his relations with Bogdanych, stopped on the bridge, not knowing what to do. There was no one to chop down (as he always imagined the battle would be), and he could not help set the bridge on fire either, because he had not taken a bundle of straw with him, like the other soldiers. He stood and looked around, when suddenly there was a crackling sound on the bridge, like scattered nuts, and one of the hussars, who was closest to him, fell on the railing with a groan. Nikolai ran up to him with the others. Again someone shouted: "Stretcher!" Four men grabbed the hussar and began to lift him.

- Ohhh! For Christ's sake, - the wounded man cried out, but they still lifted him up and laid him down. His cap fell off. They picked it up and threw it into the stretcher. Nikolai Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something, began to look into the distance, at the water of the Danube, at the sky, at the sun. How beautiful the sky seemed, how blue, calm and deep! How bright and solemn the setting sun! How gently and glossy the water sparkled in the distant Danube! And even better were the distant blue mountains beyond the Danube, the monastery, the mysterious gorges, the pine forests filled to the tops with fog... it was quiet there, happy... "Nothing, nothing would I wish for, nothing would I wish for, if only I were there," thought Nikolai. – In me alone and in this sun there is so much happiness, and here… groans, suffering, fear and this uncertainty, this haste… Here again they are shouting something and again everyone is running somewhere back, and I am running with them, and here it is, here it is death above me, around me… a moment, and I will never see this sun, this water, this gorge again…” At that moment the sun began to hide behind the clouds; another stretcher appeared in front of Nikolai. And the fear of death and the stretcher, and the love of the sun and life, all merged into one painfully anxious impression.

- Lord, God! He who is there in that sky, save, forgive and protect me! - Nikolai whispered to himself.

The hussars ran up to the horse handlers, their voices became louder and calmer, and the stretcher disappeared from sight.

“What, brother, have you smelled gunpowder?” Vaska Denisov’s voice shouted in his ear.

“It’s all over, but I’m a coward, yes, I’m a coward,” thought Nikolai, and sighing heavily, he took his horse, Grachik, who had put his leg out, from the hands of the groom and began to sit down.

“What was that – grapeshot?” he asked Denisov.

- And what a job! - Denisov shouted. - Well done! But the work was nasty! An attack is a nice thing, there you are all on fire, you don’t remember yourself, and here the devil knows what, they hit you like a target.

And Denisov rode off to the group of the regimental commander, Nesvitsky, Zherkov and the retinue officer, who had stopped not far from Rostov.

"However, it seems no one noticed," Rostov thought to himself. And indeed, no one noticed anything, because everyone was familiar with the feeling that an inexperienced cadet experienced for the first time.

“Here’s a report for you,” said Zherkov, “maybe they’ll promote me to second lieutenant.”

“Report to the prince that I set fire to the bridge,” said the colonel solemnly and cheerfully.

- And what if they ask about the loss?

"A trifle!" the colonel boomed. "Two hussars were wounded, and one was killed outright," he said with visible joy, unable to hold back a happy smile, sonorously chopping off the beautiful word "killed outright."




X


Pursued by a hundred thousand French army under the command of Bonaparte, met by hostile inhabitants, no longer trusting their allies, experiencing a shortage of provisions and forced to act outside all the foreseen conditions of war, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand, under the command of Kutuzov, hastily retreated down the Danube, stopping where it was overtaken by the enemy, and fighting back with rearguard actions only as much as was necessary in order to retreat without losing weight. There were actions at Lambach, Amstetten and Melk, but in spite of the bravery and fortitude, recognized by the French themselves, with which the Russians fought, the consequence of these actions was only an even more rapid retreat. The Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and joined Kutuzov at Braunau were now separated from the Russian army, and Kutuzov was left with only his weak, exhausted forces. It was no longer possible to think of defending Vienna. Instead of an offensive strategy of war, deeply thought out according to the laws of the new science, the plan of which had been handed to Kutuzov during his stay in Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrat, the only, almost unattainable goal that now appeared to Kutuzov was to unite with the troops coming from Russia without destroying the army, like Mack at Ulm.

On October 28, Kutuzov crossed to the left bank of the Danube with his army and stopped for the first time, putting the Danube between himself and the main French forces. On the 30th, he attacked Mortier's division on the left bank of the Danube and defeated it. In this case, trophies were taken for the first time: a banner, guns, and two enemy generals.

For the first time after a two-week retreat, the Russian troops halted and, after a struggle, not only held the battlefield, but drove the French out. Despite the fact that the troops were stripped, exhausted, weakened by one-third by the stragglers, wounded, killed, and sick; despite the fact that the sick and wounded had been left on the other side of the Danube with a letter from Kutuzov, entrusting them to the humanity of the enemy; despite the fact that the large hospitals and houses in Krems, converted into infirmaries, could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, despite all this, the halt at Krems and the victory over Mortier significantly raised the spirit of the troops. Throughout the army and at headquarters, the most joyful, although unjust, rumors circulated about the imaginary approach of columns from Russia, about some victory won by the Austrians, and about the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.

During the battle, Prince Andrei was with the Austrian General Schmidt, who was killed in the battle. His horse was wounded, and he himself was slightly scratched in the arm by a bullet. As a sign of the commander-in-chief's special favor, he was sent with news of this victory to the Austrian court, which was no longer in Vienna, which was threatened by French troops, but in Brunn. On the night of the battle, excited but not tired (despite his weak appearance, Prince Andrei could endure physical fatigue much better than the strongest people), having arrived on horseback with a report from Dokhturov to Kutuzov in Krems, Prince Andrei was sent that same night as a courier to Brunn. Being sent as a courier, in addition to awards, meant an important step towards promotion. Having received the dispatch, letters and instructions from his comrades, Prince Andrei went out onto the porch at night, by the light of a lantern, and sat in the carriage.

“Well, brother,” said Nesvitsky, seeing him off and hugging him, “I’ll congratulate you on Maria Theresa in advance.”

“As an honest man I tell you,” answered Prince Andrei, “even if they gave me nothing, it would be all the same to me. I am so happy, so happy… that I am bringing such news… that I myself saw… you understand me.”

That exciting sense of danger and consciousness of bravery which Prince Andrei had experienced during the battle was only intensified by a sleepless night and a mission to the Austrian court. He was a different man, lively and affectionate.

- Well, Christ be with you...

- Farewell, my soul. Farewell, Kozlovsky.

– Kiss Baroness Seifer’s pretty hand for me.

And at least bring a bottle of Cordial, if there’s room,” said Nesvitsky.

- I'll bring it and kiss you.

- Goodbye.

The whip cracked, and the post-chaise galloped along the dark, muddy road past the lights of the troops. The night was dark and starry, the road was black between the white snow that had fallen the day before, on the day of the battle. Now going over the impressions of the past battle, now joyfully imagining the impression he would make with the news of the victory, recalling the farewell to the commander-in-chief and his comrades, Prince Andrei experienced the feeling of a man who had waited a long time and had finally reached the beginning of the desired happiness. As soon as he closed his eyes, the firing of rifles and cannons resounded in his ears, merging with the clatter of wheels and the impression of victory. Then he began to imagine that the Russians were fleeing, that he himself was killed; but he quickly woke up, with happiness, as if he were again learning that none of this had happened and that, on the contrary, the French were fleeing. He again recalled all the details of the victory, his calm courage during the battle and, having calmed down, dozed off... After the dark starry night came a bright cheerful morning. The snow melted in the sun, the horses galloped quickly, and new diverse forests, fields, villages passed indifferently to the right and to the left.

At one of the stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded. The Russian officer leading the transport, sprawled on the front cart, was shouting something, cursing the soldier with rude words. In long German slacks, six or more pale, bandaged and dirty wounded were shaking along the rocky road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russian speech), others were eating bread, the heaviest, silently, with meek and painful childish concern, looked at their courier galloping past.

“Unfortunate people!” thought Prince Andrei, “and they are needed too…” He ordered them to stop and asked the soldier why they were wounded.

- The day before yesterday on the Danube, - answered the soldier. Prince Andrei took out his purse and gave the soldier three gold pieces.

“For everyone,” he added, turning to the officer who had approached. “Get well, guys,” he said to the soldiers, “there’s still a lot of work to do.”

“Well, Mr. Adjutant, what news?” asked the officer, apparently wanting to start a conversation.

- Good. Forward! - he shouted to the driver and galloped on. It was already quite dark when Prince Andrei rode into Brunn and found himself surrounded by tall houses, lights from shops, windows, houses and lamps, beautiful carriages rustling along the pavement and all that atmosphere of a large, lively city which is always so attractive to a military man after camp. Prince Andrei, in spite of his fast ride and sleepless night, felt even more animated as he approached the palace than the day before. Only his eyes sparkled with a feverish gleam, and his thoughts changed with extraordinary speed and clarity. All the details of the battle again appeared to him vividly, no longer vaguely but definitely, in the condensed account which he had made in his imagination to the Emperor Franz. The face of the Emperor and all the casual questions which might be put to him and the answers which he would give to them were vividly presented to him. He believed that he would be introduced to the Emperor at once. But at the large entrance to the palace an official ran out to him and, recognizing him as a courier, escorted him to another entrance.

- From the corridor to the right; there, your Excellency, you will find the duty aide-de-camp. He will take you to the Minister of War.

The aide-de-camp on duty, who met Prince Andrei, asked him to wait and went to the Minister of War. Five minutes later the aide-de-camp returned and, bowing especially politely and letting Prince Andrei go ahead of him, led him through the corridor to the office where the Minister of War was working. The aide-de-camp, with his exquisite politeness, seemed to want to protect himself from the attempts at familiarity of the Russian aide-de-camp. Prince Andrei's joyful feeling weakened considerably as he approached the door of the Minister of War's office. He felt insulted, and, as always happened in his proud soul, the feeling of insult changed at the same moment, imperceptibly for himself, into a feeling of contempt, based on nothing. His resourceful mind at the same moment suggested to him the point of view from which he had the right to despise both the aide-de-camp and the Minister of War. "They must find it very easy to win victories without smelling gunpowder," he thought. His eyes narrowed contemptuously, his limbs drooped lifelessly, and he entered the office of the Minister of War, as if dragging his feet with difficulty. This feeling was further strengthened when he saw the Minister of War sitting over a large table and for the first two minutes paying no attention to the man who had entered. The Minister of War lowered his bald head with gray temples between two wax candles and read, marking the papers with a pencil. He finished reading without raising his head, when the door opened and footsteps were heard.

“Take this and hand it over,” said the Minister of War to his adjutant, handing over the papers and not yet paying attention to the courier.

Prince Andrei felt that either of all the matters occupying the Minister of War, the actions of Kutuzov's army were the least likely to interest him, or that the Russian courier had to be made to feel this. "But it's all the same to me," he thought. The Minister of War moved the remaining papers, aligned them, edge to edge, and raised his head. He had an intelligent and characteristic head. But at the same moment as he turned to Prince Andrei, the intelligent and firm expression on the face of the Minister of War, apparently habitually and consciously changed, and on his face there settled a stupid, feigned smile, not hiding its pretense, of a man receiving many petitioners one after another.

- From Field Marshal Kutuzov? - he asked. - Good news, I hope? Was there a clash with Mortier? Victory? It's time!

He took the dispatch, which was addressed to him, and began to read it with a sad expression.

- Oh, my God! oh, my God! Schmidt! - he said in German. - What a misfortune, what a misfortune! - Having glanced over the dispatch, he put it on the table and looked at Prince Andrey, apparently thinking about something. - Oh, what a misfortune! The matter, you say, is decisive? Mortier is not taken, however. - He thought. - I am very glad that you have brought good news, although the death of Schmidt is a high price to pay for victory. His Majesty will probably wish to see you, but not today. Thank you, rest. Be at the exit tomorrow after the parade. However, I will let you know.

The stupid smile that had disappeared during the conversation appeared again on the face of the Minister of War.

"Goodbye, thank you very much. The Emperor will probably wish to see you," he repeated and bowed his head.

Prince Andrei went out into the reception room. There were two adjutants there, who were talking to each other, apparently about something completely unrelated to the arrival of Prince Andrei. One of them reluctantly stood up, and with the same insulting politeness asked Prince Andrei to write down his rank, title and address in the book the adjutant had given him. Prince Andrei silently fulfilled his wish and, without looking at him, left the reception room.

When he left the palace, he felt that all the interest and happiness which the victory had given him had now been abandoned by him and handed over to the indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the courteous adjutant. His whole frame of mind instantly changed; the battle seemed to him an old, distant memory; the immediate and most interesting objects for him were the reception of the Minister of War, the courtesy of the adjutant, and the forthcoming presentation to the Emperor.




XI


Prince Andrei went to see the Russian diplomat Bilibin. The German, the diplomat's servant, recognized Prince Andrei, who had stayed with Bilibin during his visit to Vienna, and, meeting him, spoke volubly.

- Herr von Bilibin had to leave his apartment in Vienna. Damned Bonaparte! - said the diplomatic servant. - How many misfortunes, how much loss, how much disorder he caused!

“Is Mr. Bilibin well?” asked Prince Andrey.

- Not quite well, not leaving yet, but will be very glad to see you. Come here. Your things will be picked out. Will the Cossack stay here? And they heard.

- Ah, dear prince, there is no more pleasant guest, - said Bilibin, coming out to meet him. - Franz, the prince's things are in my bedroom. What, a messenger of victory? Excellent. And I sit here sick, as you see.

“Yes, a messenger of victory,” answered Prince Andrei, “but, it seems, not very welcome.”

“Well, if you’re not tired, tell me about your great exploits over dinner,” said Bilibin, sitting down with his feet on the couch in the corner of the fireplace, when Prince Andrei, having washed and dressed, went out into the diplomat’s luxurious study and sat down to the prepared dinner. “Franz, fix the screen, otherwise the prince will be hot.”

Prince Andrei, not only after his journey, but after the whole campaign, during which he had been deprived of all the comforts of cleanliness and elegance of life, experienced a pleasant feeling of rest amidst those luxurious conditions of life to which he had been accustomed since childhood. In addition, after the Austrian reception, it was pleasant for him to talk, if not in Russian (they spoke French), but with a Russian man who, he knew, shared his disgust (now especially vividly felt) for the Austrians. The only thing that had an unpleasant effect on him was that Bilibin listened to his story with almost the same mistrust and indifference with which the Austrian Minister of War listened to him.

Bilibin was a man of about thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same social class as Prince Andrei. They had known each other since Petersburg, but had become especially close during Prince Andrei's last visit to Vienna with Kutuzov. Bilibin had asked him, if he came to Vienna, to stay with him without fail. Just as Prince Andrei was a young man who promised to go far in the military field, so Bilibin promised even more in the diplomatic field. He was still a young man, but no longer a young diplomat, since he had begun serving at the age of sixteen, had been in Paris, in Copenhagen, and now in Vienna, and occupied a fairly significant position. Both the Chancellor and our envoy to Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those large number of diplomats who are obliged to have only negative qualities, not to do certain things, and to speak French, in order to be very good diplomats. He was one of those diplomats who love and know how to work, and despite his laziness, he sometimes spent nights at his desk. He worked equally well, no matter what the essence of the work was. He was not interested in the question "why?", but in the question "how?" What the diplomatic matter was, he did not care, but to draw up a circular, memorandum or report skillfully, accurately and elegantly - this was what he found great pleasure in. Bilibin's merits were valued, in addition to his written works, also for his skill in addressing and speaking in the highest circles.

Bilibin loved conversation as much as he loved work, only when the conversation could be elegantly witty. In society he was always on the lookout for an opportunity to say something remarkable and would not enter into conversation otherwise than under these conditions. Bilibin's conversation was constantly sprinkled with original, witty, complete phrases of general interest. These phrases were prepared in Bilibin's inner laboratory as if deliberately portable so that insignificant society people could conveniently remember them and carry them from drawing room to drawing room. And indeed, Bilibin's comments were distributed throughout all the drawing rooms of Vienna, were often repeated and often had an influence on so-called important matters.

His thin, emaciated, unusually white face was all covered with large, youthful wrinkles, which always seemed as cleanly and carefully washed as fingertips after a bath. The movements of these wrinkles constituted the main play of his physiognomy. Sometimes his forehead wrinkled into wide folds, his eyebrows rose upward, sometimes his eyebrows dropped downward, and large wrinkles formed at the cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always looked straight and cheerfully.

In his whole face, his figure and the sound of his voice, despite the refinement of his clothes, the refinement of his manners and the elegant French language in which he spoke, the features of a Russian man were sharply expressed.

Bolkonsky, in the most modest manner, without ever mentioning himself, told the story and the reception of the Minister of War.

“They received me with this news as they receive a dog at a game of bowling,” he concluded.

Bilibin smiled and loosened the folds of skin.

“However, my dear,” he said, examining his nail from afar and again picking up the skin above his left eye, “with all my respect for the Orthodox army, I believe that your victory is not one of the most brilliant.”

He continued speaking in French, only using those words in Russian that he contemptuously wanted to emphasize.

- How so? You, with all your mass, fell upon the unfortunate Mortier with one division, and this Mortier escapes through your hands? Where is the victory?

“However, speaking seriously,” answered Prince Andrei, pushing his plate away, “we can still say without boasting that this is a little better than Ulm.”

- Why didn’t you take one, at least one marshal for us?

- Because not everything is done as expected, and not as regularly as at a parade. We assumed, as I told you, to enter the rear by seven o'clock in the morning, but we didn't arrive by five in the evening.

- Why didn't you come at seven o'clock in the morning? You should have come at seven o'clock in the morning, - Bilibin said smiling, - so you should have come at seven o'clock in the morning.

“Why didn’t you convince Bonaparte diplomatically that it would be better for him to leave Genoa?” Prince Andrei asked in the same tone.

- I know, - Bilibin interrupted, - you think that it is very easy to capture marshals, sitting on the sofa in front of the fireplace. It is true, but still, why didn’t you take him? And don’t be surprised that not only the Minister of War, but also the august Emperor and King Franz will not be very happy with your victory, and I, the unfortunate secretary of the Russian embassy, ​​do not feel any need to give my Franz a thaler as a sign of joy and let him go with his girlfriend to the Prater... True, there is no Prater here.

He looked straight at Prince Andrei and suddenly pulled the gathered skin down from his forehead.

"Now it's my turn to ask you 'why', my dear," said Bolkonsky. "I confess to you that I don't understand, perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties here beyond my feeble mind, but I don't understand. Mack loses an entire army, Archduke Ferdinand and Archduke Charles show no signs of life and make mistake after mistake, finally Kutuzov alone wins a real victory, destroys the charm of the French, and the Minister of War is not even interested in knowing the details.

- That's exactly why, my dear. Take another piece of roast, nothing more will happen.

- Thank you.

– You see, my dear, hurray! For the Tsar, for Rus', for the faith! – all this is fine and good, but what do we, I say, the Austrian court, care about your victories? Bring us here some nice news of the victory of Archduke Charles or Ferdinand, one Archduke is worth another, as you know, – even over the company of Bonaparte’s fire brigade, that’s another matter, we’ll thunder our cannons. But this, as if on purpose, can only tease us. Archduke Charles does nothing, Archduke Ferdinand covers himself with shame, you abandon Vienna, you no longer defend it, as if you were to tell us: God is with us, and God is with you, with your capital; one general whom we all loved, Schmidt, you are putting him in danger of being shot and congratulating us on our victory!.. You have captured some two debarders dressed up as Bonaparte's generals. You must admit that you cannot think of anything more irritating than the news you are bringing. It is as if on purpose, as if on purpose. Besides, well, even if you had won a brilliant victory, even if Archduke Charles had won, what would that have changed in the general course of affairs? It is too late now that Vienna is occupied by French troops.

- How busy? Is Vienna busy?

– Not only is she busy, but Bonaparte is in Schönbrunn, and the Count, your dear Count Vrbna, is going to him for orders.

Bolkonsky, after fatigue and the impressions of the journey, the reception, and especially after dinner, felt that he did not understand the full meaning of the words he had heard.

“That’s a different matter entirely,” he said, and, taking out a toothpick, he moved closer to the fireplace.

- This morning Count Lichtenfels was here, - continued Bilibin, - and showed me a letter in which the French parade in Vienna was described in detail. Prince Murat, and all that... You see that your victory is not very joyful and that you cannot be accepted as a savior...

"Really, it makes no difference to me, absolutely no difference," said Prince Andrei, beginning to understand that his news of the battle at Krems really had little importance in view of such events as the occupation of the capital of Austria. "How was Vienna taken? And the bridge and the famous bridge fortification, and Prince Auersperg? We had rumors that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna," he said.

- Prince Auersperg is on this, our side, and he is protecting us, I think, very poorly, but he is protecting us nonetheless. And Vienna is on that side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken, and I hope it will not be taken, because it is mined and they have ordered it to be blown up. Otherwise we would have long ago been in the mountains of Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour between two fires.

“If that’s the case, then the campaign is over,” said Prince Andrei.

- That's what I think too. And that's what the big caps here think, but they don't dare say it. It will be what I said at the beginning of the campaign, that it won't be your Durenstein strike, or gunpowder at all, that will decide the matter, but those who invented it, - said Bilibin, repeating one of his catchphrases, loosening the skin on his forehead and pausing. - The only question is what the Berlin meeting of Emperor Alexander with the Prussian king will say. If Prussia joins the alliance, they will force Austria, and there will be war. If not, then it's only a matter of (take this pear, it's very good) agreeing on where to draw up the initial articles of the new Campo Formio.

- But what extraordinary genius! - Prince Andrey suddenly cried out, squeezing his small hand and slamming it on the table. - And what happiness this man is!

- Bonaparte? - Bilibin said questioningly, wrinkling his forehead and thus giving the feeling that a joke was about to be made. - Bonaparte? - he said, emphasizing especially the u. - I think, however, that now that he prescribes the laws of Austria from Schönbrunn, we must rid him of the u. I am decisively making an innovation, and simply calling him Bonaparte. Would you like some more coffee or not? Franz!

- No, no joke, - said Prince Andrey, - you are able to know. How do you think all this will end?

- And here's what I think. Austria has been left a fool, and she's not used to it, and she'll pay back. And she's been left a fool because, firstly, the provinces have been ruined (they say that the Orthodox are terrible at plundering), the army has been defeated, the capital has been taken, and all this for the sake of the beautiful eyes of the Sardinian majesty.

“Are they waiting for the Tsar?” asked Prince Andrey.

- Every day. We are deceived; already now I sense with my instinct the relations with France and the plans for peace, a secret peace, concluded separately.

“That will be nice!” said Prince Andrey.

- We'll wait and see.

They were silent.

Bilibin loosened the skin again as a sign that the conversation was over.

– Do you know that during your last visit here you achieved a complete victory over Baroness Seifer?

“What, is she still as enthusiastic?” asked Prince Andrei, recalling one of the pleasant women with whom he had had great success during his visit to Vienna with Kutuzov.

- She is a woman, not a lady, - Bilibin told his joke. - Tomorrow we will go to her. For your sake and for hers I will not obey my doctor. It is necessary to spend these days here well. Whatever the Austrian cabinet may be, the people, especially the women, are unusually nice, and I would like nothing more than to spend my whole life in Vienna. Ah, do you know who is a regular visitor to her drawing room? Our Ippolit Kuragin. He is the most obvious fool I have ever seen. Tomorrow you will see him at my place. Our people gather at my place on Thursdays, and you will see them all. Well, however, go to bed; I see that you are falling.

When Prince Andrei came to the room prepared for him and lay down in clean linen on the down-padded coats and fragrant warm pillows, he felt that the battle about which he had brought news was far, far away from him. The Prussian alliance, Ippolit Kuragin, Baroness Seifer, the betrayal of Austria, Bonaparte's new triumph, the exit and parade, and the reception of Emperor Franz for the next day occupied him. He closed his eyes, but at the same moment his ears began to crackle with cannonade, shooting, the clatter of carriage wheels, and here again the musketeers, stretched out like a thread, were descending from the mountain, and the French were firing, and he felt his heart tremble, and he rode forward next to Schmidt, and the bullets whistled merrily around him, and he experienced that feeling of tenfold joy of life, which he had not experienced since childhood. He woke up...

“Yes, all this happened!..” he said, happily, smiling to himself like a child, and fell into a deep, youthful sleep.




XII


The next day he woke up late. Resuming the impression of the past, he remembered first of all that today he had to present himself to the Emperor Franz, remembered the Minister of War, the polite Austrian aide-de-camp, Bilibin and the conversation of the previous evening. The memory of the battle seemed to him something long ago, long past and insignificant. Having dressed in full dress uniform, which he had not worn for a long time, for the trip to the palace, he, fresh, lively and handsome, with a sling in his arm, more in a high-society and courtly than in a military frame of mind, entered Bilibin's study. In the study were already sitting, lying and standing several gentlemen of the diplomatic corps who visited Bilibin, whom he called "ours". Most were Russians, but there was one Englishman and one Swede. Bolkonsky was acquainted with many of them, as with Prince Ippolit; Bilibin introduced him to others, calling Bolkonsky the messenger of victory, which was already known to the whole city.

- Feathers... - said Bilibin, pointing to his men, - a sword, - he said, pointing to Bolkonsky. - Gentlemen, I recommend to you one of those people who have the art of always being happy. He has always been loved by the sweetest women, has the sweetest wife, a beautiful appearance, and has never been and will never be wounded in the nose, in the stomach, or even worse, like my friend Captain Gnilopupov. A glorious name! Unfortunately, you, gentlemen foreigners, - he turned to the Englishman and the Swede, - cannot appreciate all the charm and euphony of this name. No, gentlemen, please explain to me why Captain Gnilopupov is always wounded in the nose or simply killed, but a man like Bolkonsky in the arm, to make him even more attractive in the eyes of women.

The guests who visited Bilibin, society, young, rich and cheerful people, formed both in Vienna and here a separate circle, which Bilibin, who was the head of this circle, called ours - les n^tres. This circle, consisting almost exclusively of diplomats, apparently had its own interests, having nothing in common with war and politics, in high society, relations with certain women and the clerical side of service. These gentlemen, apparently, willingly, as one of their own (an honor which they did few), accepted Prince Andrei into their circle. Out of politeness and as a subject for entering into conversation, they asked him several questions about the army and the battle, and the conversation again fell apart into inconsistent cheerful jokes and gossip. They all spoke French. And, despite their habit of this language and their animation, the conversation had the character of pretense or imitation of some other person's merriment.

- But what is especially good, - said one, telling of the failure of a fellow diplomat, - what is especially good is that the chancellor told him straight out that his appointment to London was a promotion and that he should look at it that way. You should have seen his figure at that!.. But what is worst of all, gentlemen, I give you Kuragin: a man in misfortune, and this Don Juan, this terrible man, takes advantage of it.

Prince Ippolit lay in a Voltaire chair, with his legs over the arm; he laughed wildly.

“Come on, come on,” he said.

- Oh, Don Juan! Oh, snake, - voices were heard.

“You don’t know, Bolkonsky,” Bilibin turned to Prince Andrei, “that all the horrors of the French army (I almost said the Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has done among women.”

“A woman is a man’s friend,” Prince Ippolit said sententiously and began to look through his lorgnette at his raised legs.

Bilibin and ours burst out laughing unceremoniously, looking into Ippolit's eyes. Prince Andrei saw that this Ippolit, whom he (he had to admit) was almost jealous of his wife, was simply the jester of this merry company.

“No, I must treat you to Kuragin,” Bilibin said quietly to Bolkonsky. “He is delightful when he talks about politics; you have to see his importance.”

He sat down next to Ippolit and, gathering his folds on his forehead, began a conversation with him about politics. Prince Andrei and the others surrounded both of them.

“The Berlin cabinet cannot express its opinion on the union,” Ippolit began, looking around at everyone significantly, “without expressing… as in its last note… you understand… you understand… however, if His Majesty the Emperor does not change the essence of our union…”

Prince Andrei, despite the fact that our people were listening to Ippolit with joyful faces, walked away in disgust; but Ippolit grabbed him by the hand.

- Wait, I haven't finished... - he continued, obviously wanting to instill respect for his political considerations in the new person. - I think that intervention will be stronger than non-intervention. And... - he paused - it is impossible to consider the matter finished by not accepting our dispatch of November 28. That is how it will all end.

And he let go of Bolkonsky's hand, showing that he was now completely finished.

- Demosthenes! I recognize you by the little stone you hide in your golden lips, - said Bilibin, whose cap of hair moved on his head with pleasure.

And everyone laughed with a friendly and lively laughter, especially excited by the laughter of Ippolit himself, who, apparently, was suffering, choking, but could not restrain himself from wild laughter, and his always motionless face stretched.

- Well, gentlemen, - said Bilibin, - Bolkonsky is my guest, in the house and here. And I want to treat him, as much as I can, to all the joys of life here. If we were in Vienna, it would be easy; but here, in this nasty Moravian hole, it is difficult, and I ask all of you for help. We must show him Brunn. You take on the theater, I the society; you, Ippolit, of course, the women.

"We must show him Amelie, she's a darling!" said one of our men, kissing the tips of her fingers. "Come with me."

- And from there we go to Baroness Seifer. I am going out for you for the first time today, and the night is yours, if you wish to take advantage of it. One of the gentlemen can guide you.

“In general, this bloodthirsty soldier Bolkonsky,” someone said, “must be converted to more humane views.”

- And may he love our Brunn and our dear Vienna!

“However, it’s time for me to go,” said Bolkonsky, looking at his watch, who, despite the bustle of the conversation, had not forgotten for a minute the upcoming presentation to the emperor.

- Where are you going?

- To the emperor.

- OOO!

- Well, goodbye, Bolkonsky! Goodbye, Prince, come and dine earlier, - voices were heard. - We'll take care of you.

“Try to praise the order in the delivery of provisions and routes as much as possible when you speak with the emperor,” said Bilibin, accompanying Bolkonsky to the front hall.

“And I would like to praise, but I can’t, as far as I know,” Bolkonsky answered smiling.

- Well, in general, talk as much as possible. His passion is audiences, but he himself does not like to speak and does not know how, as you will see.




XIII


Emperor Franz approached Prince Andrei, who was standing at the appointed place between the Austrian officers at the exit, and quickly said a few indistinct but obviously kind words to him and passed on. After leaving yesterday, the aide-de-camp of the previous day, who had now become an entirely different, polite and tactful person, conveyed to Bolkonsky the Emperor's desire to see him once more. Before entering the study, Prince Andrei, at the sight of the whispering courtiers, at the sight of the respect that was shown to him now that they knew that he would be received by the Emperor, felt that he, too, was excited by the upcoming meeting. But again this feeling of excitement in an instant turned in his soul into a feeling of contempt for conventional greatness and for this crowd of whispering courtiers, ready to betray themselves and the truth to please the Emperor. "No," said Prince Andrei to himself, "no matter how difficult the upcoming meeting may put me in, I will put all considerations aside and tell one complete and direct truth." But the conversation that took place between him and the Emperor did not give him an opportunity to speak either the truth or the untruth. Emperor Franz received him, standing in the middle of the room. Before beginning the conversation, Prince Andrei was struck by the fact that the Emperor seemed confused, not knowing what to say, and blushed.

"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hastily. Prince Andrei answered. After this question followed other, equally simple questions: "Is Kutuzov well?" "How long ago did he leave Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spoke with such an expression as if his whole purpose consisted only in asking a certain number of questions. The answers to these questions, as was all too obvious, could not interest him.

“What time did the battle begin?” asked the emperor.

“I cannot tell your Majesty at what time the battle began at the front, but in Durenstein, where I was, the army began the attack at six o’clock in the evening,” said Bolkonsky, becoming animated and assuming at this opportunity that he would be able to present a truthful description of everything he knew and saw, already prepared in his head. But the Emperor smiled and interrupted him.

- How many miles?

- From where and to where, your majesty?

– From Durenstein to Krems?

- Three and a half miles, Your Majesty.

– Have the French left the left bank?

– As reported, the scouts were the last to cross on rafts at night.

– Is there enough fodder in Krems?

– The forage was not delivered in the required quantity...

The Emperor interrupted him.

- At what time was General Schmidt killed?..

Having asked this last question, which required a short answer, the Emperor said that he thanked him and bowed. Prince Andrei went out, and without knowing why, for the first minute, despite the amazing simplicity of the Emperor's figure and manners, despite his philosophy, Prince Andrei felt not quite sober. He was surrounded when he came out of the study door, kind eyes and smiles were looking at him from all sides, and kind words were heard. Yesterday's polite aide-de-camp made him kindly reproaches for not staying in the palace in the department for foreign couriers. The Minister of War came up to him, congratulating him on the Order of Maria Theresa, 3rd degree, which the Emperor had bestowed on him. He did not know to whom to answer, and collected his thoughts for a few seconds. The Russian envoy took him by the shoulder, led him to the window and began to talk to him. Contrary to his and Bilibin's expectations, the performance was a complete success. A thanksgiving service was called. Kutuzov was awarded the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the entire army received awards. The Empress wanted to see Prince Bolkonsky, and invitations to dinners and evenings poured in from all sides.

On his return from the palace, Prince Andrei, sitting in his carriage, mentally composed a letter to his father about all the circumstances of the battle, the journey to Brunn, and the conversation with the Emperor. Whatever he thought about, the conversation with the Emperor, this empty, this simply stupid conversation, arose again in his imagination with all the smallest details of the facial expression and intonation of Emperor Franz.

“At what time was General Schmidt killed?” he repeated to himself. “He really needed to know at what time General Schmidt was killed. Why didn’t he ask at what time, in what minutes and seconds? What considerations important for the state would he draw from this knowledge? But worse and more stupid than the question was the excitement with which I began this conversation. And the excitement of all these old men at the thought that he was talking to me. Two days ago, standing under bullets, each of which could have brought death, I did not experience even a hundredth part of the excitement that for some reason I felt while talking to this simple, kind and completely insignificant man. Yes, you have to be a philosopher,” he concluded and, instead of going straight to Bilibin, went to the bookstore to stock up on books for the expedition. He sat there, sorting through philosophical works unknown to him, for more than an hour. When he drove up to Bilibin's porch, he was surprised by the sight of a half-packed carriage standing there, and Franz, Bilibin's servant, who ran out to meet him with an upset look.

- Ah! Your Excellency! - said Franz. - What a misfortune!

“What is it?” asked Bolkonsky.

- We're heading even further, God knows where. The villain is already on our heels again.

Bilibin came out to meet Bolkonsky. There was excitement on Bilibin's always calm face.

"No, no, admit that it's a delight," he said, "this story with the Tabor Bridge in Vena. They crossed it without resistance.

Prince Andrey did not understand anything.

- Where are you from, that you don’t know what all the coachmen in the city already know? Aren’t you from the palace?

- From the palace. I saw the emperor too. Kutuzov received the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa.

- Now it's not about the crosses. Is it possible that they don't know anything there?

- Nothing, maybe after me; I went to the shops from there... But what's the matter?

- Well, now I understand. What's going on? This is wonderful!.. The French crossed the bridge that Auersperg is protecting, and they didn't blow it up, so Murat is now running along the road to Brunn, and today or tomorrow they'll be here.

- How is it here? How come they didn't blow up the bridge when it was mined?

- And this is what I am asking you. No one, not even Bonaparte himself, knows this.

Bolkonsky shrugged.

“But if the bridge is crossed, then the army is also lost, it will be cut off,” he said.

- I think.

- But how did this happen?

– That’s the whole point and the beauty of it. Listen. The French are entering Vienna, as I told you. Everything is going very well. The next day, that is, yesterday, the gentlemen marshals, Murat, Lannes and Belliard, mount and set out for the bridge. (Note that all three are Gascons.) “Gentlemen,” says one, “you know that the Tabor bridge is mined and counter-mined and that before us is a formidable bridge fortification and fifteen thousand troops who have been ordered to blow up the bridge and not let us through. But our sovereign Emperor Napoleon will be pleased if we take this bridge. Let us go, the three of us, and take this bridge.” “Let us go,” say the others, and they set out and take the bridge, cross it, and now with the entire army on this side of the Danube they are heading towards us, you and your communications.

- Stop joking.

“I am not joking at all,” continued Bilibin, responding to Bolkonsky’s impatient and distrustful movement, “there is nothing more just and sadder. These gentlemen arrive at the bridge alone and raise white handkerchiefs, assuring that there is a truce and that they, the marshals, are going to negotiate with Prince Auersperg. The officer on duty lets them into the bridge fortification. They tell him a thousand Gascon nonsense, say that the war is over, that the Emperor Franz has made an appointment with Bonaparte, that they wish to see Prince Auersperg, and a thousand Gascons, and so on. The officer sends for Auersperg, these gentlemen embrace the officers, joke, sit on the cannons, and meanwhile the French battalion, unnoticed, enters the bridge, throws sacks of flammable substances into the water and approaches the bridge fortifications. Finally, the lieutenant general himself appears, our dear Prince Auersperg von Mautern. “Dear enemy! Flower of the Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars! The feud is over, we can shake hands… The Emperor Napoleon is burning with desire to know Prince Auersperg.” In a word, these gentlemen are not without reason Gascons, they shower this Indian rooster Auersperg with beautiful words, he is so seduced by his so quickly established intimacy with the French marshals, so blinded by the sight of Murat’s mantle and ostrich feathers, that he sees only their fire and forgets his own, the one he was obliged to open against the enemy.

(Despite the liveliness of his speech, Bilibin did not forget to pause after this to allow time to appreciate it.)

The French battalion runs onto the bridge fortification, the guns are hammered in, and the bridge is taken. No, but what is best of all,” he continued, calming his excitement by the charm of his own story, “is that the sergeant assigned to the gun, at the signal of which the mines were to be lit and the bridge blown up, this sergeant, seeing that the French troops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes pulled his hand away. The sergeant, who was evidently smarter than his general, goes up to Auersperg and says: “Prince, you are being deceived, here are the French!” Murat sees that the matter is lost if the sergeant is allowed to speak. With feigned surprise (a true Gascon), he turns to Auersperg: “I do not recognize the Austrian discipline so praised in the world,” he says, “and you allow a low rank to speak to you like that.” This is brilliant. Prince Auersperg is offended and orders the sergeant arrested. No, admit that this whole story with the bridge is delightful. It's not stupid, it's not mean.

“Perhaps treason,” said Prince Andrey, apparently unable to share the pleasure that Bilibin found in the stupidity of the fact told. This story instantly changed the city, high-society mood he had brought out of the palace. He thought about the situation in which Kutuzov’s army was now placed, thought about how, instead of the quiet days in Brunn, he would immediately have to gallop to the army and take part there either in a desperate struggle or in disgrace. And gray overcoats, wounds, gunpowder smoke and the sounds of gunfire instantly arose vividly in his imagination. And again at that moment, as always when he thought about the general course of affairs, a strong, proud patriotic feeling of fear for the defeat of the Russians was strangely combined in his soul with triumph over the triumph of his hero. The campaign is over. All the forces of all Europe, all calculations, all efforts have been destroyed in two months by the genius and good fortune of this incomprehensible fatal man…

- Also no. This puts the court in the most absurd position, - Bilibin continued. - This is neither treason, nor meanness, nor stupidity, it is like at Ulm... - He seemed to think, searching for an expression, - this is poppy seed. We have dipped ourselves, - he concluded, feeling that he had said un mot and a fresh mot, a joke that he would repeat. The folds on his forehead that had been gathered until then quickly unraveled as a sign of pleasure, and he, smiling slightly, began to examine his nails.

“Where are you going?” he said suddenly, turning to Prince Andrei, who did not say a word, stood up and headed to his room.

- I'm on my way.

- Where?

- To the army.

- Yes, you wanted to stay two more days.

- And now I'm leaving right now.

And Prince Andrei, having given orders to leave, went to his room.

- You know what, my dear, - said Bilibin, entering his room. - I thought about you. Why are you going? - And as proof of the irrefutability of this argument, all the wrinkles ran away from his face.

Prince Andrei looked questioningly at his interlocutor and said nothing.

- Why are you going? I know you think it's your duty to gallop into the army now that the army is in danger. I understand that, my dear, it's heroism.

“Not at all,” said Prince Andrey.

- But you are a philosopher; be one completely, look at things from the other side, and you will see that your duty, on the contrary, is to take care of yourself. Leave that to others who are no longer fit for anything. You were not ordered to come back, and you were not allowed to leave here, therefore you can stay and go with us, wherever our unfortunate fate takes us. They say they are going to Olmütz. And Olmütz is a very nice town. And you and I will go together quietly in my carriage.

“You’re joking, Bilibin,” said Bolkonsky.

- I am speaking to you sincerely and in friendship. Judge for yourself. Where and why will you go now that you can stay here? One of two things awaits you (he gathered the skin above his left temple): either you will not reach the army, and peace will be concluded, or defeat and disgrace with the entire Kutuzov army.

And Bilibin loosened his skin, feeling that his dilemma was irrefutable.

“I cannot judge that,” Prince Andrey answered coldly. “I am more than a philosopher, I am a man, and that is why I am going.”

“My dear, you are a hero,” said Bilibin.

“Not at all, I’m a simple officer doing my duty, that’s all,” Prince Andrei said, not without pride.




XIV


That same night, having said goodbye to the Minister of War, Bolkonsky rode to the army, not knowing where he would find it, and fearing being intercepted by the French on the way to Krems.

In Brunn the entire court population was packing up, and the heavy loads were already being sent to Olmütz. Why Bolkonsky had gone to the army and not stayed in Brunn, what reasoning had led him to this, he could not have said. As soon as he heard the terrible news from Bilibin, the medal of life, which he had looked at from the cheerful side, instantly turned upside down. He saw only evil in everything and instinctively felt the need to take part in all this evil. “Nothing can come of it but disgrace and ruin for our troops, under the conditions in which we are fighting this fatal genius,” he thought with gloomy thoughts, tired, hungry and angry, having passed the French and riding up the next day to the place where, according to rumors, Kutuzov was supposed to be. Near Etzelsdorf, Prince Andrei came to the road along which the Russian army was moving with the greatest haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so clogged with carts that it was impossible to ride in a carriage. Having borrowed a horse and a Cossack from the Cossack chief, Prince Andrei, overtaking the supply trains, rode to find the commander-in-chief and his cart. The most ominous rumors about the state of the army reached him along the way; and the sight of the army fleeing in disorder confirmed him even more in the conviction that the cause of the campaign was finally lost. He looked at everything happening around him with contempt and sadness, like a man no longer belonging to this world.

"This Russian army, which English gold brought here from the end of the world, will suffer the same fate, the fate of the Ulm army," he recalled the words of Bonaparte's order to his army before the start of the campaign, and these words aroused in him both admiration for the brilliant hero and a feeling of offended pride. "Nothing remains but to die," he thought. "Well, if it must be done!

I will do it no worse than anyone else."

The disorder and haste of the army's movement, increased by the constantly repeated orders of the general staff to move as quickly as possible, reached the highest degree. The jokers-Cossacks, wanting to laugh at the orderlies sleeping in the carts, shouted: "French!" - and galloped past. The cry: "French!" - rolled like a growing lump of snow over the entire column: everything rushed, crushing and overtaking each other, and even shots and battle fire of the infantry were heard, shooting at no one knew at whom. Barely a quarter of an hour later the commanders of the movement were able to stop this confusion, which cost the lives of several people who were crushed, and one who was shot.

Prince Andrey looked with indifferent contempt at these endless, obstructing teams, carts, parks, artillery, and again carts, carts and carts of all possible types, overtaking one another and blocking the dirty road in three or four rows. From all sides, behind and in front, as far as the ear could reach, could be heard the sounds of wheels, the rumbling of cart bodies and gun carriages, the clatter of horses, the blows of whips, the shouts of urging, the curses of soldiers, orderlies and officers. Along the edges of the road one could constantly see fallen, skinned and unskinned horses, broken carts with lonely soldiers sitting by them waiting for something, or soldiers separated from their teams who were heading in crowds to neighboring villages or dragging chickens, rams, hay or sacks filled with something from the villages. On the descents and ascents the crowds grew thicker, and there was a continuous groan of shouts. The soldiers, sinking knee-deep in mud, caught up the guns and wagons with their hands; whips beat, hooves slipped, traces snapped, and chests were torn with cries. The officers in charge of the movement rode forward and back between the wagon trains. Their voices were faintly audible amid the general hubbub, and it was evident from their faces that they despaired of the possibility of stopping this disorder.

“Here it is, the respected Orthodox army,” thought Bolkonsky, recalling Bilibin’s words.

Wanting to ask one of these people where the commander-in-chief was, he rode up to the wagon train. Directly opposite him rode a strange one-horse carriage, apparently built with the soldiers' household means, representing a middle ground between a cart, a cabriolet and a carriage. A soldier was driving the carriage and a woman, all wrapped in kerchiefs, was sitting under the leather top behind an apron. Prince Andrei rode up and was already turning to the soldier with a question when his attention was drawn to the desperate screams of the woman sitting in the kibitochka. The officer in charge of the wagon train was beating the soldier, who was sitting as a coachman in this carriage, because he wanted to go around the others, and the whip hit the apron of the carriage. The woman was screaming piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrei, she stuck her head out from behind her apron and, waving her thin arms that had jumped out from under the carpet shawl, shouted:

- Adjutant! Mr. Adjutant!.. For God's sake... protect us! What will happen?.. I am the doctor's wife of the 7th Jaeger... they won't let us in, we've fallen behind, we've lost our own...

"I'll smash you into a pancake, turn me away!" the angry officer shouted at the soldier. "Turn me back with your whore."

- Mister Adjutant, protect me. What is this? - the doctor screamed.

- Please let this carriage pass. Don't you see that it is a woman? - said Prince Andrey, riding up to the officer.

The officer looked at him and, without answering, turned back to the soldier.

- I'll go around... Back!..

“Let me through, I tell you,” Prince Andrei repeated again, pursing his lips.

- And who are you? - the officer suddenly turned to him with drunken fury. - Who are you? Are you (he especially emphasized the word "you") the boss, or what? I am the boss here, not you. You, back off, - he repeated, - I will beat you into a pancake.

The officer apparently liked this expression.

“He gave the adjutant a very important dressing down,” a voice was heard from behind.

Prince Andrei saw that the officer was in that drunken fit of causeless rage in which people do not remember what they are saying. He saw that his intercession for the doctor's wife in the kibitochka was filled with what he feared most in the world, what is called stupid and ridiculous, but his instinct said otherwise. Before the officer could finish his last words, Prince Andrei, with a face terribly disfigured by rage, rode up to him and raised his whip.

- Please let me through!

The officer waved his hand and quickly drove away.

“It’s all because of these staff members,” he grumbled. “Do as you please.”

Prince Andrei hurriedly, without raising his eyes, rode away from the doctor’s wife, who called him her savior, and, recalling with disgust the smallest details of this humiliating scene, galloped on to the village where, as he had been told, the commander-in-chief was located.

Having entered the village, he got off his horse and went to the first house with the intention of resting for at least a minute, eating something and bringing to light all those offensive thoughts that tormented him.

“This is a crowd of scoundrels, not an army,” he thought, approaching the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by name.

He looked back. Nesvitsky's handsome face was sticking out of a small window. Nesvitsky, waving his arms, was calling him to come to him.

- Bolkonsky! Bolkonsky! Can't you hear? Come quickly, - he shouted.

Entering the house, Prince Andrei saw Nesvitsky and another adjutant. They quickly turned to Bolkonsky and asked if he knew anything new. On their faces, so familiar to him, Prince Andrei read an expression of alarm and concern. This expression was especially noticeable on the always laughing face of Nesvitsky.

“Where is the commander-in-chief?” asked Bolkonsky.

“Here, in this house,” answered the adjutant.

- Well, what then? Is it true that there is peace and capitulation? - asked Nesvitsky.

- I'm asking you. I don't know anything except that I barely got to you.

- And what about us, brother! Horrible! I apologize, brother, they laughed at Mac, and now it’s even worse for themselves, - said Nesvitsky. - Come on, sit down and eat something.

“Now, Prince, you won’t find any carts or anything, and God knows where your Peter is,” said another adjutant.

- Where is the main headquarters? Are we spending the night in Znaim?

“And I have loaded everything I need onto two horses,” said Nesvitsky, “and they have made excellent packs for me. I could even run away through the Bohemian Mountains. It’s bad, brother. Are you unwell, I suppose, that you are shaking so?” asked Nesvitsky, noticing how Prince Andrei twitched as if he had touched a Leyden jar.

“Nothing,” answered Prince Andrey.

At that moment he remembered his recent encounter with the doctor’s wife and the furshtat officer.

“What is the commander-in-chief doing here?” he asked.

“I don’t understand anything,” said Nesvitsky.

“I understand one thing, that everything is disgusting, disgusting, disgusting,” said Prince Andrei and went into the house where the commander-in-chief stood.

Prince Andrei walked past Kutuzov's carriage, the exhausted saddle horses of his retinue, and the Cossacks who were loudly talking to each other. Prince Andrei entered the entryway. Kutuzov himself, as Prince Andrei was told, was in the hut with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. He was an Austrian general who had replaced the murdered Schmidt. In the entryway, little Kozlovsky was squatting in front of the clerk. The clerk, sitting on an overturned tub, with the cuffs of his uniform rolled up, was writing quickly. Kozlovsky's face was exhausted - he, too, had obviously not slept all night - and gloomy, worried, more than ever. He glanced at Prince Andrei and did not even nod his head.

– Second line... Have you written it? – he continued, dictating to the clerk. – Kiev Grenadier, Podolsk...

“You won’t make it, your honor,” the clerk answered, looking disrespectfully and angrily at Kozlovsky.

At that moment, Kutuzov's animated and dissatisfied voice could be heard from behind the door, interrupted by another, unfamiliar voice. In the sound of these voices, in the inattention with which Kozlovsky looked at him, in the disrespect of the exhausted clerk, in the very fact that the clerk and Kozlovsky were sitting so close to the commander-in-chief on the floor near the tub, that the Cossacks holding the horses were laughing loudly under the window of the house, Prince Andrei felt that something important and unfortunate was about to happen. Prince Andrei, however, persistently turned to Kozlovsky with questions.

“Right now, Prince,” said Kozlovsky. “Disposition for Bagration.”

-What about capitulation?

- There is none, all orders for the battle have been made.

Prince Andrei headed towards the door from behind which voices could be heard.

But while he was about to open the door, the voices in the room fell silent, the door itself opened, and Kutuzov appeared on the threshold. Prince Andrei stood directly opposite Kutuzov, but from the expression of the commander-in-chief's only seeing eye it was evident that thought and care occupied him so much that they seemed to cloud his vision. He looked straight at the face of his adjutant and did not recognize him.

“Well, are we done?” he turned to Kozlovsky.

- Right away, your Excellency.

Bagration, a short man with an oriental type of firm and motionless face, a dry man, not yet old, followed the commander-in-chief.

“I have the honor to appear,” repeated Prince Andrei quite loudly, handing over the envelope.

- Ah, from Vienna? Good. Later, later.

Kutuzov went out onto the porch with Bagration.

- Well, Prince, farewell! Christ be with you. I bless you for your great feat.

Kutuzov's face suddenly softened, and tears appeared in his eyes. He pulled Bagration to himself with his left hand, and with his right, on which was the ring, he apparently made the sign of the cross with a habitual gesture and offered him his plump cheek, instead of which Bagration kissed him on the neck.

“Christ be with you!” repeated Kutuzov and approached the carriage.

“Sit down with me,” he said to Bolkonsky.

- Your Excellency, I would like to be of use here. Allow me to remain in Prince Bagration's detachment.

“Sit down,” said Kutuzov, noticing that Bolkonsky was hesitating, “I need good officers myself, I need them myself.”

They got into the carriage and rode in silence for several minutes.

“There is still much ahead, much more to come,” he said with an old man’s expression of insight, as if he had understood what was going on in Bolkonsky’s soul. “If one tenth of his detachment comes tomorrow, I will thank God,” Kutuzov added, as if speaking to himself.

Prince Andrei glanced at Kutuzov, and his eyes were involuntarily drawn to the cleanly washed creases of the scar on Kutuzov's temple, half an arshin away, where the Izmail bullet had pierced his head. "Yes, he has the right to speak so calmly about the death of these people," thought Bolkonsky.

“That’s why I’m asking you to send me to this detachment,” he said.

Kutuzov did not answer. He seemed to have forgotten what he had said and sat lost in thought. Five minutes later, gently rocking on the soft springs of the carriage, Kutuzov turned to Prince Andrei. There was not a trace of excitement on his face. With subtle mockery, he questioned Prince Andrei about the details of his meeting with the Emperor and the comments he had heard at court about the Kremlin affair. It was evident that he had foreseen everything his adjutant was telling.




XV


Kutuzov received news through his spy on November 1 that put the army he commanded in an almost hopeless situation. The spy reported that the French in huge forces, having crossed the Vienna Bridge, were heading towards Kutuzov’s line of communication with the troops coming from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain in Krems, Napoleon’s army of one hundred and fifty thousand would cut him off from all communications, would surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would find himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to abandon the road leading to communications with the troops from Russia, he would have to enter the unknown lands of the Bohemian Mountains without a road, defending himself from an enemy superior in strength, and abandon all hope of communications with Buxhoeveden. If Kutuzov had decided to retreat along the road from Krems to Olmütz to join up with the troops from Russia, he would have risked being forestalled on this road by the French, who had crossed the bridge in Vienna, and thus being forced to accept battle on the march, with all the burdens and baggage trains, and having to deal with an enemy three times his size and surrounded on both sides. Kutuzov chose this last option.

The French, as the scout reported, having crossed the bridge in Vienna, were marching hard on Znaim, which lay on Kutuzov's retreat route, more than a hundred miles ahead of him. To reach Znaim before the French meant to gain greater hope for saving the army; to let the French forestall them in Znaim meant to subject the entire army to a disgrace similar to Ulm, or to a common death. But forestalling the French with the entire army was impossible. The French road from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the Russian road from Krems to Znaim.

On the night of receiving the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's six-thousand-strong vanguard to the right through the mountains from the Krem-Znaim road to the Vienna-Znaim road. Bagration was to go through this crossing without rest, stop facing Vienna and with his back to Znaim, and if he managed to warn the French, he was to delay them as long as he could. Kutuzov himself, with all his burdens, set off for Znaim.

Having marched with hungry, barefoot soldiers, without a road, through the mountains, on a stormy night, forty-five miles, having lost a third of the stragglers, Bagration reached Hollabrunn, on the Vienna-Znaim road, several hours before the French, who were approaching Hollabrunn from Vienna. Kutuzov had to go another whole day with his supply trains to reach Znaim, and therefore, in order to save the army, Bagration, with four thousand hungry, exhausted soldiers, had to hold off the entire enemy army that had met him at Hollabrunn for twenty-four hours, which was obviously impossible. But a strange fate made the impossible possible. The success of this deception, which gave the Vienna bridge into the hands of the French without a fight, prompted Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in the same way. Murat, meeting Bagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road, thought that it was Kutuzov's entire army. In order to undoubtedly crush this army, he waited for the troops that had fallen behind on the road from Vienna and for this purpose proposed a three-day truce, on the condition that both troops did not change their positions and did not move from their place. Murat assured that peace negotiations were already underway and that therefore, to avoid useless bloodshed, he proposed a truce. The Austrian general Count Nostitz, who was stationed at the outposts, believed the words of Murat's envoy and retreated, opening up Bagration's detachment. Another envoy rode to the Russian chain to announce the same news about peace negotiations and to propose a truce to the Russian troops for three days. Bagration replied that he could not accept or not accept the truce and sent his adjutant to Kutuzov with a report on the proposal made to him.

For Kutuzov, an armistice was the only way to gain time, to give Bagration's exhausted detachment a rest, and to allow the supply trains and heavy loads, whose movements were hidden from the French, to make at least one extra march to Znaim. The offer of an armistice offered the only and unexpected chance to save the army. Having received this news, Kutuzov immediately sent Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was with him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was to accept the armistice and also to offer terms of capitulation, while Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten the movement of the entire army's supply trains along the Kremsko-Znaim road as much as possible. Bagration's exhausted, hungry detachment alone had to cover the movement of the supply trains and the entire army, and remain motionless before an enemy eight times stronger.

Kutuzov's expectations were fulfilled both in that the non-binding offers of capitulation could give time for some of the supply trains to pass, and in that Murat's mistake was to be discovered very soon. As soon as Bonaparte, who was in Schonbrunn, 25 miles from Hollabrun, received Murat's report and the armistice and capitulation plan, he saw through the deception and wrote the following letter to Murat:



To Prince Murat.

Schönbrunn, 25th Brumaire 1805, at eight o'clock in the morning.

I cannot find words to express my displeasure to you. You command only my vanguard and have no right to make a truce without my order. You are forcing me to lose the fruits of an entire campaign. Break the truce immediately and go against the enemy. You will tell him that the general who signed this capitulation had no right to do so, and no one else has, with the exception of the Russian Emperor.

However, if the Russian Emperor agrees to the said condition, I will agree too, but this is nothing more than a trick. Go and destroy the Russian army. You can take its baggage and its artillery.

The general is the adjutant of the Russian emperor... Officers mean nothing when they have no official powers, and he has none either. The Austrians allowed themselves to be deceived when crossing the Vienna Bridge, and you are allowing yourself to be deceived by this general, the adjutant of the emperor.

Napoleon.



Bonaparte's adjutant galloped at full speed with this threatening letter to Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting his generals, moved with the entire guard to the battlefield, afraid to miss the ready victim, and Bagration's four-thousand-strong detachment, cheerfully laying fires, dried themselves, warmed themselves, cooked, for the first time in three days, porridge, and none of the men in the detachment knew or thought about what lay ahead of them.




XVI


At four o'clock in the evening, Prince Andrei, having insisted on his request from Kutuzov, arrived in Grunt and appeared before Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet arrived at Murat's detachment, and the battle had not yet begun. Bagration's detachment knew nothing about the general course of affairs; they talked about peace, but did not believe in its possibility. They talked about battle, but also did not believe in the proximity of the battle. Bagration, knowing Bolkonsky as his beloved and trusted adjutant, received him with special military distinction and indulgence, explained to him that there would probably be a battle today or tomorrow, and gave him complete freedom to be with him during the battle or in the rearguard to observe the order of retreat, "which was also very important."

“However, today, probably, there will be no business,” said Bagration, as if reassuring Prince Andrei.

“If this is one of the ordinary staff dandies sent to receive a cross, then he will receive an award in the rearguard, but if he wants to be with me, let him... he will be useful, if he is a brave officer,” thought Bagration.

Prince Andrei, without answering, asked the prince's permission to go round the position and find out the location of the troops so that if he were given an order he would know where to go. The duty officer of the detachment, a handsome man, smartly dressed and with a diamond ring on his index finger, who spoke French poorly but willingly, volunteered to accompany Prince Andrei.

The duty staff officer occupied one of the ruined houses in the village of Grunt, and Prince Andrei went to him while they were saddling their horses. Behind the broken partition, a stove was burning, and in front of the stove, wet boots were drying, wrinkled and brightened, and a soaking-through overcoat was smoking. Three officers were sleeping on the floor in the room, the atmosphere was heavy.

- Sit down, Prince, at least here, - said the staff officer in French. - They'll bring me a horse now. These are our gentlemen, Prince. After two nights in the rain, there was nowhere to dry off.

These officers presented a pitiful and sad appearance. The entire village presented the same sad and disordered appearance when they mounted their horses and rode through it. On all sides one could see wet officers with sad faces, as if searching for something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches and fences from the village.

“We can’t get rid of these people, Prince,” said the staff officer, pointing at these people. “The commanders are disbanding them.”

And here, - he pointed to the camp follower's pitched tent, - they'll gather and sit. This morning I drove them all out, look, it's full again. We must ride up, Prince, and scare them off. One minute.

“Let’s go and I’ll get some cheese and a roll from him,” said Prince Andrei, who had not yet had time to eat.

- Why didn’t you say so, Prince?

They got off their horses and entered the sutler's tent. Several officers with flushed and exhausted faces were sitting at tables, drinking and eating.

"Well, gentlemen," said the staff officer in a reproachful tone, like a man who had already repeated the same thing several times. "You can't just leave like that. The prince ordered that no one should be there. Well, you, Mr. Staff Captain," he turned to a small, dirty, thin artillery officer, who, without boots (he had given them to the sutler to dry), in stockings only, stood before those who had entered, smiling not quite naturally.

- Well, aren't you ashamed, Captain Tushin? - the staff officer continued. - It would seem that you, as an artilleryman, should set an example, but you're without boots. They'll sound the alarm, and you'll look very good without boots. (The staff officer smiled.) Please go to your places, gentlemen, everyone, everyone, - he added in a commanding tone.

Prince Andrei smiled involuntarily, looking also at Staff Captain Tushin. Silently and smiling, Tushin shifted from one bare foot to the other, looking questioningly with his large, intelligent and kind eyes first at Prince Andrei, then at the staff officer.

“The soldiers say: the wiser, the more dexterous,” said Captain Tushin, smiling and shyly, apparently wanting to move from his awkward position to a joking tone; but before he could finish speaking, he felt that his joke had not been accepted and had failed. He was embarrassed.




End of preview fragment.


Text provided by LitRes LLC.

Read this book in full by purchasing the full legal version (https://www.litres.ru/pages/biblio_book/?art=66691848&lfrom=1021453250&ffile=1) on LitRes.

You can safely pay for the book with a Visa, MasterCard, Maestro bank card, from a mobile phone account, from a payment terminal, at an MTS or Svyaznoy store, via PayPal, WebMoney, Yandex.Money, QIWI Wallet, bonus cards or any other method convenient for you.


